16092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Integrated Learning-Based Framework for
Autonomous Quadrotor UAV Landing on a
Collaborative Moving UGV
Chang Wang , Jiaqing Wang , Zhaowei Ma, Mingjin Xu, Kailei Qi, Ze Ji , Member, IEEE, and Changyun Wei

Abstract—Autonomous unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) landing
on a moving unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) remains a challenge
as it is difficult for the UAV to track the real-time state of the
UGV and adjust its landing policy accordingly. This paper proposes a learning framework for a quadrotor UAV to land on a
moving UGV without knowing its motion dynamics. Specifically,
the learning framework consists of two main systems: a Landing
Vision System (LVS) using deep learning and a Landing Control
System (LCS) using deep reinforcement learning. The LVS enables the UAV to recognize and localize the UGV in real time to
estimate the relative position and velocity between them. Besides,
the location of the UGV is tracked in the field of view of the UAV
using consecutive images, alleviating the tracking failure problem.
We propose a Memory Consolidated TD3 (MCTD3) algorithm to
generate optimal policies to enable precise tracking and landing
control of the UAV. In addition, we propose an adaptive COACH
(ACOACH) algorithm that allows human intervention in the action
space of the UAV to speed up the training process. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method in both simulation and
real-world experiments.
Index Terms—Autonomous landing, bio-inspired system,
convolutional neural networks, deep reinforcement learning, UAV
landing, YOLO.

I. INTRODUCTION
NMANNED aerial vehicles (UAVs) and unmanned
ground vehicles (UGVs) have been widely used in a
variety of real-world applications, including agriculture [1],

U

Manuscript received 6 January 2024; revised 15 May 2024; accepted 4 July
2024. Date of publication 11 July 2024; date of current version 7 November 2024.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62303481 and Grant 52371275, and in part by University
Independent Scientific Research Project under Grant 2022505070. The review
of this article was coordinated by Prof. Haejoon Jung. (Chang Wang and Jiaqing
Wang contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Changyun Wei.)
Chang Wang and Zhaowei Ma are with the College of Intelligence Science
and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073,
China.
Jiaqing Wang is with the State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering and
Institute of Oceanography, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240,
China.
Mingjin Xu is with the College of Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering,
Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan 430033, China.
Kailei Qi and Changyun Wei are with the College of Mechanical and
Electrical Engineering, Hohai University, Changzhou 213022, China (e-mail:
c.wei@hhu.edu.cn).
Ze Ji is with the School of Engineering, Cardiff University, CF24 3AA Cardiff,
U.K.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3425755

logistics [2], reconnaissance [3], and search-and-rescue [4].
Coordination between UAVs and UGVs is often more practical for solving complex, interdependent tasks than using them
individually. For instance, when a quadrotor UAV hovers at a
certain height, it can share a global terrain view with a UGV for
efficient path planning. On the other hand, the UGV can provide
the UAV with a battery charging facility to extend the flight time.
Autonomous landing is essential for a UAV to collaborate with
a UGV [5], [6], [7]. If reliable GPS coordinates of the UAV and
the landing destination were provided, the landing task could
be solved as a control problem. A robust autonomous landing
system enables the UAV to cooperate effectively in such critical
situations to provide real-time surveillance, medical delivery, or
communication relays [8], [9]. This can be achieved through the
use of fuzzy control [10], Model Predictive Control (MPC) [11],
PD (Proportional, Derivative) control [12], PID (Proportional,
Integral, Derivative) control [13], and Unfortunately, these methods may fail in GPS-denied environments, such as search and
rescue inside mountains or fire scene [14], [15], [16]. To tackle
this issue, the UAV can apply vision-based control methods to
track and locate the destination, using vision combined with
reinforcement learning to address the landing task [17], [18].
In our previous work [5], [19], we integrated the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [20] reinforcement learning
algorithm with the traditional PID controller to achieve autonomous tuning of PID parameters. However, the UAV would
occasionally lose track of the UGV in its field of view, revealing
the need to provide it with reliable target tracking, localization, and landing control. Minaeian et al. [21] proposed an
air-ground localization method to achieve accurate multi-ground
target recognition. Yet, the proposed method is too complex and
susceptible to interference.
Based on existing machine learning theories for autonomous
navigation, our study advances the application of these theories
in complex, GPS-denied environments by introducing a novel integration of a learning framework for a quadrotor UAV to land on
a moving UGV without knowing its motion dynamics. Precisely,
our integrated learning framework consists of two systems: the
onboard Landing Vision System (LVS) for UGV detection and
the Landing Control System (LCS) for UAV motion control, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. The UAV can accurately land without the
UGV’s prior motion information. Furthermore, the UAV can
adjust its pose to regain recognition when it loses perception of

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: INTEGRATED LEARNING-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR AUTONOMOUS QUADROTOR UAV LANDING

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1. Tracking and landing process of our proposed autonomous landing
system.

16093

Framework of TD3.

where st+1 is the state at the time step t + 1 and π(at | st )
represents the policy that maps from the state space to the action
space. Neural networks are used to calculate the Q-values for
each state-action pair. A function approximator is designed to
minimize the error through the trained and optimized parameter
θ∗ , as follows:


(2)
θ∗ = arg min E (δt − Qθ (st , at ))2 ,
θ

the UGV, thus increasing its robustness during the actual landing
process. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
r The integrated learning framework enables reliable UAV
tracking of the UGV while learning the optimal landing
policy.
r We design a lightweight pipeline to achieve rapid detection
and localization of the moving UGV, which can provide accurate relative positions and velocity estimations between
the UAV and UGV.
r We propose an efficient deep reinforcement learning algorithm MCTD3 for learning the landing policy, and we
propose an interactive learning algorithm ACOACH to
incorporate human experience for more efficient learning.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents the related preliminaries of deep reinforcement learning
and the kinematic model of the landing task. We illustrate our
system framework in Section III. Our proposed LVS and LCS
are elaborately described in Sections IV and V. Section VI
discusses the experimental results. Finally, we conclude the
paper in Section VII.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Deep Reinforcement Learning and TD3
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [22] combines the advantages of deep neural networks and reinforcement learning
(RL) to learn control policies for high-dimensional or continuous
state spaces. The Q-value Qπ (st , at ) is defined as the expected
cumulative future discounted rewards for an action at taken at
the time step t. RL aims to find the optimal policy that maximizes
the expected return. In a deterministic policy μ, the Q-value is
defined by the Bellman expectation condition:
Qμ (st , at ) = E [rt + γQμ (st+1 , μ (st+1 ))] ,

(1)

where δt = rt + γ maxa Qθ (st+1 , a) is defined as the Temporal
Difference error (TD-errors), essentially the difference between
the predicted and actual values of the reward.
Although Q-value-based approaches are useful in searching
for the optimal policy μφ , parameterized by φ, a more efficient
approach is to use the policy gradient
method to maximize the accumulated reward J(μφ ) = Eμφ [ t R(st , at )]. The gradients
are used to update φ and are calculated as [23].
Actor-critic methods combine both value-based and policygradient methods [24]. When the agent interacts with the environment at the time step t, the state st is observed, and the agent
receives an action command at from the policy π(at | st ; θ)
accordingly.
Twin delayed deep deterministic policy gradient (TD3) represents one of the most successful applications of the actor-criticbased reinforcement learning paradigm, as shown in Fig. 2. One
of the known issues with value-based reinforcement learning
methods is that the Q-function tends to overestimate the Q-value,
leading to suboptimal policies due to function approximation
errors. TD3 addresses this problem by constraining the overestimated Q-value by taking the minimum value between a pair of
critic networks Qθi (s, a)i=1,2 , where θi(i=1,2) are the parameters
of the critic networks. Furthermore, Gaussian noises are added
to the actions generated from the actor network to explore
the environment fully. Then, we use the Bellman equation to
calculate a target value y(r, s ). The smaller item of the two
outputs (Qθ1 , Qθ2 ) from the target critic networks is fed into the
Bellman equation to avoid overestimating the Q -value as:
y (r, s ) = r + γ min Qθi (s , πφ (s ) + ε) ,
i=1,2

(3)

where ε is the Gaussian noise added to enhance the exploration
ability of the agent. We then update the critic networks as
follows:

(y − Qθi (s, a))2 .
(4)
θi ← argminθi N −1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 3.

Definition of the coordinate system and forces acting on the UAV.

Fig. 4.

Conversion process from the PCS to the WCS.

Meanwhile, the target actor network is not updated consecutively to reduce the overestimation problem. In TD3, however,
the parameter φ will be updated by the deterministic policy
gradient after certain training iterations, in the author’s case,
e.g., updated the target critic networks two times [25]. The
equation for the policy update is described as follows:



∇φ πφ (s). (5)
∇a Qθ1 (s, a)
∇φ J(φ) = N −1
a=πφ (s)

Finally, a hyper-parameter τ (0 < τ < 1) is introduced for the
soft update, which reduces the problem of over-fitting during the
training. The target networks are updated as follows:
θi ← τ θi + (1 − τ )θi
φ ← τ φ + (1 − τ )φ .

(6)

B. Coordinate System
The Coordinate System used in our study consists of several
sub-systems, including the Pixel Coordinate System (PCS),
the Camera Coordinate System, the Rack Coordinate System,
the World Coordinate System (WCS), and the Target Coordinate
Systems (TCS), as shown in Fig. 3. These sub-systems are
essential for understanding the position and orientation of the
UAV. In our design, the onboard camera is fixed to the UAV Rack.
Therefore, we combine the Camera Coordinate System with the
Rack Coordinate System as Camera & Rack Coordinate System
(CCS). We also examined a quadrotor UAV with a rack in the
X-configuration. The rack provides upward forces through four
mini-motors installed perpendicular to the rack and rotation in
the OC ZC negative direction. The pipeline for the UAV camera’s
transformation of the PCS into the WCS is shown in Fig. 4.
III. FRAMEWORK
The problem of UAV landing can be represented as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). When the UAV detects the UGV, it
can estimate its relative position and velocity, which allows the
agent to calculate the state vector. We define the MDP for the
landing task as {S, A, P, R, γ}. The current state st leads to the

Fig. 5.

The state transition for UAV autonomous landing.

next state st+1 once the UAV perceives the current state st and
executes the current action at , as depicted in Fig. 5.
1) state:
The state vector st at the time step t is defined as
(Δdxt , Δdyt , Δdzt , Δvxt , Δvyt , Dt ) ∈ S, where
S represents a six-dimensional continuous state space.
(Δdxt , Δdyt , Δdzt ) denotes the relative distances of the
UAV to the UGV in the WCS at the time step t, and
(Δvxt , Δvyt ) represents the relative velocity between the
UAV and the Landing Platform (LP) in the x and y axes.
Dt serves as a warning variable indicating whether the
UAV is approaching the boundary of the LP.
2) action:
The action space A is defined as a three-dimensional
continuous space. The action a is represented as a =
(vx , vy , vz ) ∈ A, where vx , vy , and vz denote the reference
velocities sent to the UAV’s velocity controller along the
x, y, and z axes in the WCS.
3) policy:
Solving the MDP involves determining a policy πθ ∈ Π :
S × A → [0, 1] within a finite time horizon T , where
πθ is parameterized by θ. The policy P represents the
conditional probability p(s | s, a). It is defined as a mapping from the state-action space (S × A) to a probability distribution over the next state space S, denoted as
P : S × A → P (S).
4) reward function:
Formulating an effective landing policy P necessitates the
creation of a well-defined reward function R.
The realization of each reward rt at discrete time steps comprises three components: tracking rewards, rdist and rvelo , and
landing guidance reward, rland .
r Distance reward rdist : The design of rdist is to encourage
the agent to minimize the relative distance at each step.
The relative distance
 between the UAV and the target is
calculated as dt = Δd2xt + Δd2yt . The tracking process

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

