Proc. of the International Conference on Electrical, Computer, Communications and Mechatronics Engineering (ICECCME)

2022 International Conference on Electrical, Computer, Communications and Mechatronics Engineering (ICECCME) | 978-1-6654-7095-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICECCME55909.2022.9988707

16-18 November 2022, Maldives

Interactive Real-time Leader Follower Control
System for UAV and UGV
Aidana Tassanbi
School of Engineering and Digital Science
Nazarbayev University
Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
aidana.tassanbi@nu.edu.kz

Aziz Iskakov
School of Engineering and Digital Science
Nazarbayev University
Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
aziz.iskakov@nu.edu.kz

Ton Duc Do
School of Engineering and Digital Science
Nazarbayev University
Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
doduc.ton@nu.edu.kz

Md. Hazrat Ali*
School of Engineering and Digital Science
Nazarbayev University
Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan
*md.ali@nu.edu.kz

Abstract — This article is aimed at creating a leader-follower
system for Unmanned Aerial vehicles (UAV) and Unmanned
Ground vehicles (UGV) with obstacle avoidance. In this system,
the UAV acts as a leader, which is given the coordinates of a
predetermined path, along which it must follow according to its
algorithm. While the UGV is a follower, that needs to follow the
leader by avoiding obstacles. QDrone and QBot from QUANSER
were used as vehicles, and the OptitTack tracking system was
applied for determining their locations. The article presents
simple algorithms created for both vehicles and the results of the
experiment. The experiment showed that all algorithms work
flawlessly. However, problems arose with the accuracy of placing
obstacles due to the limited power of the follower's onboard
computer.

reaching a consensus between the agents through
communication. Other studies considered the loss of one of
the agents (followers) and the ability of them to re-form into
another formation during the mission [5-7]. Research has
also been carried out to create a leader-follower system
consisting of several 2WMRs that are able to bypass
obstacles. In this case, the obstacle is detected by the leader,
that re-computes the route, while the followers simply follow
the leader [8]. In this study, the authors use the potential field
method, the main idea of which is to determine the range of
obstacles for different orientations of the sensors and to
determine the polar density of the obstacle. After that, the
path with the lowest density is determined, which the vehicle
must follow in order to avoid the obstacle and reach the
target point [8]. Apart from that, a system was created where
the UAV follows the landing station in the form of a UGV to
be able to land on it at any time [9]. This article aims to create
a controller for a leader-follower system for a quadcopter and
a two-wheeled mobile robot with obstacle avoidance. This
system is different in that the leader is a drone that has no
obstacles in the air. Whereas the robot must follow the drone
while creating its way through obstacles. This system can be
used in many areas. For example, in delivery services, in the
study of hard-to-reach places and objects, military purposes,
and rescue works. Indeed, in most cases, there are fewer
obstacles in the air than on the ground, which creates the
need to create such a system.

Keywords — Leader-Follower system, UAV, UGV, QUARC,
OptiTrack, obstacle avoidance.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Today, process automation is an integral part of any
advanced system. Automated auxiliary robots are popular
not only in production but also in everyday life, for example,
vacuum cleaner robots, waiter robots, etc. The demand for
unmanned vehicles and other modes of transport is growing
every year. Moreover, more and more research has recently
been carried out aimed at creating leader-follower algorithms
for multi-vehicle systems. These systems can be used in a
wide range of applications, from military applications to
delivery services.
A.

Related work

The leader-follower system for unmanned vehicles may be
in high demand. There are many studies that consider
systems consisting of several Unmanned Ground Vehicles
(UGVs) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) which form
a formation when following the leader [1-3]. Gopakumar
and Shihabudheen considered the system with 1 leader and 6
followers, three of which are quadrotors, while the other 4
vehicles are two-wheeled mobile robots (2WMRs) [4]. This
study aimed to develop a cooperative control algorithm for

II.
A.

METHODS

Dynamic modeling

Using Newton's laws and the Euler-Lagrange method, you
can create a dynamic model of a quadcopter. The motion of
the UAV can be described using a system consisting of six
non-linear differential equations:

⎧ẍ = (sin +
⎪
ӱ = (sin
⎨
⎪
⎩ # = −g + (

−

) ,

) ,

) ,

=

=

=

!

""
%

978-1-6654-7095-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(1)

F

where x, y, and z are the Cartesian coordinates of the
quadcopter (Fig. 1); φ, θ, ψ are the Euler angles (φ is the yaw,
θ is the pitch, and ψ is the roll angle); Jxx, Jyy, and Jzz are
diagonal elements of UAV’s inertia tensor; m is the mass of
the quadcopter; g is the acceleration due to gravity; F = (Fz,
Fφ, Fθ, Fψ) – virtual control forces, which can be described
by the motor control forces as:
&' = () + (* + (+ + (,
&- = .((+ − (, )
&/ = .(() − (* )
&0 = 12 (() + (* − (+ − (, )

@C = H
G

C
G
C

@I = J

(5)

(2)

where L is the distance between UAV’s center and its motor,
Cy is a constant obtained experimentally, that depends on the
relationship between thrust and yawing moment; T- thrust
force generated by the rotation of propellers.

Fig. 2.

Schematic diagram for UGV.

B.

Communication and Localization

Communication between the vehicles and the computer is
provided through a router and a wireless Wi-Fi connection,
which assigns an individual IP address to the computer,
drone, and robot. By setting up hardware settings in
MATLAB Simulink and using QUARC blocks that can
transmit information to the carrier of the specified IP
address, control and command of vehicles were provided.
Fig. 1.

Schematic diagram for UAV.

In this experiment UGV (QBot 2e) has only two wheels that
are connected to the motor, that can rotate and act
independently from each other. This allows QBot to drive
and make a U-turn right on the spot around its axis. From
Fig. 1 it can be seen that point C is set in the center of the
wheel axis and this point can be counted as the current
position of the robot with (x, y) coordinates and orientation
angle φ that was taken with respect to the x-axis.
Since the floor surface is a rough, dense rubber with an
abrasive pattern, a lot of friction is established between the
QBot 's wheels and the floor, allowing the robot to move and
turn with negligible slip. It is also worth considering that the
weight of the robot is not sufficient to deform the wheels.
Considering all this, the non-linear cinematic equation for
the Robot will be the following:
53
cos
13 = 4 63 7 = 8sin
3
0

0 ?
0= >@A
1

(3)

where ν and ω are linear and angular velocities of QBot,
respectively. Since Qbot’s wheels are driven separately, we
will have two equations for them, that are:
? = ? + D@
B C
?E = ? − D@

To determine the location of vehicles in space, the OptiTrack
system was used. For this, 6 cameras were installed at the
corners and sides of the workspace and connected to the
ground station (PC) by wires. The cameras record the
location of special markers that have been attached to
vehicles and determine the location and orientation of an
object. For each vehicle for identification, 5 such markers
were attached according to a certain scheme. This system is
quite accurate and, according to the manufacturer, allows
determining the location of an object with an accuracy of 2
mm [10].
C.

Leader-Follower algorithm

Communication with the drone and robot is first established
when starting the system. As soon as the connection has been
confirmed and all three Simulink models have been launched
without problems, the "Mission server" receives, processes,
and sends data from OptiTrack to the leader and follower.
This data contains information about the location and
orientation of the vehicles. If OptiTrack receives incorrect
data or does not recognize the vehicles at all, the QDrone
Commander model is immediately terminated. To run the
algorithm, it is necessary for QDrone to take off to a height
of at least 0.5 m, this is done using the joystick by giving the
drone the “Arm” and “Takeoff” commands. As soon as both
switches have been activated, QBot starts its algorithm
which is provided in Fig. 3.

(4)

where l is the distance from the center of the wheels’ axis to
each wheel. With simple manipulation, the equation for the
angular velocity of each wheel can be calculated as shown
below, where R corresponds to the radius of the wheels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Recieve positions of
follower and leader

Read positions
of leader and
follower

Generate new
follower
trajectory

Is
start/stop
toggle on?

Are the Arm
and Takeoff
switches on?

Stop
following

Send current
location of the
Leader

No
Yes
Is the follower
Yes
within 0.25 m of
the leader?

No
Yes
Read sensors.
Obstacle
detected?

No

Send current
waypoint

Yes
Record the Yes
location of the
obstacle

No

Was it the last
waypoint?
Yes

No

Send home
position: [0 0 1 0]

Yes

No

Send the next
waypoint

OptiTrack is
tracking?

Yes
Fig. 4.
Is the
Emergency stop
switch off?

Stop model

Fig. 3.

No

Yes

Follow
generated
trajectory

Mission server algorithm.

With regard to UAV, its algorithm consists of checking the
system for battery level, flight altitude, communication or
localization problems, and receiving commands to land or
follow to a new position. This algorithm is shown in Fig. 3.
In addition, the QDrone, as the leader, constantly sends its
location to the follower.

Algorithm for the follower.

As soon as the QBot Commander receives the coordinates of
the leader and follower, it generates the follower Trajectory.
This data is transformed into angular and linear speed, which
are given to the QBot. If an obstacle is detected by sensors,
the robot will recalculate its trajectory using the obstacle
avoidance algorithm described below. As can be seen from
Fig. 3, the algorithm continues to run until a tracking issue
occurs or the "Stop" button on the joystick is triggered. If the
"Arm" or "Take off/Landing" switches are turned off, the
robot will stop following the leader, but will continue to
calculate the trajectory.

Recieve measured and
desired positions of
Leader

No

Are Arm and
Takeoff
switches on?

Yes
Yes

Low
battery
?

No
Is the
Leader at
the desired
height?

When the system is started, the QDrone hovers over the
takeoff point, and the QBot approaches it until the distance
between them is less than 0.25 m. As soon as the
"Start/Stop" button is triggered in "Mission Server", the
algorithm starts, according to which the QDrone flies to
predetermined points. As can be seen from Fig. 4, the
"Mission Server" constantly compares the coordinates of the
leader and follower. As soon as the follower approaches the
leader, the algorithm sends the next waypoint to the leader.
When the system reaches the last waypoint, the "Mission
Server" sends the coordinates of the center of the work area
so that the drone will land in the center.

No

Yes
Yes

Communic
ation
issue?

No
Optitrack
is
tracking?

Stop model

Fig. 5.

No

Yes Go to the desired
position

Algorithm for the leader.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:52:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

