Landing for the Hunt:
UAV-UGV Cooperation in a Predator-Prey Scenario

2025 Brazilian Conference on Robotics (CROS) | 979-8-3315-5288-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CROS66186.2025.11066150

Felipe dos Anjos Rezende1 and Guilherme Serra Francisco Pinel1 and Alexandre S. Brandão1 .

Abstract—Cooperative robotics has emerged as a promising
approach to solving complex tasks requiring collaboration among
multiple agents. This paper proposes a decentralized system
for cooperation between unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs), where robots operate independently without direct information exchange. The methodology
is based on a leader-follower formation strategy, where the
UGV acts as the leader and provides visual information to the
UAV through color segmentation for relative position detection.
Based on this data, the UAV adjusts its trajectory to align
with the UGV and execute a landing maneuver. Experiments
were conducted to validate the approach on linear and circular
trajectories, demonstrating the system’s effectiveness in reducing
visual errors and achieving precise landings on moving targets.
The results indicate that the proposed approach exhibits accuracy
and robustness in various scenarios.
Index Terms—Predator-Prey, Leader-Follower, UAV, UGV, Image Processing

I. I NTRODUCTION
Cooperative robotics has emerged as a promising approach
for addressing complex tasks that require collaboration among
multiple robots. Cooperative association models include centralized strategies, in which a central unit makes decisions
and distributes commands to the agents [1]–[4]. Decentralized
strategies are also widely used, in which robots make decisions
based on local information gathered from the environment or
through interactions with other robots [5]–[8].
Beyond organizational models, different association strategies among robots are observed depending on the level of
coordination and the nature of the task. These include the
leader-follower model, where one robot assumes the role of
leader, and the others adjust their actions to follow it [9],
[10], and the predator-prey strategy, which involves pursuing
and capturing a moving target [11]. Additional strategies
involve structured formations, in which robots maintain specific geometric configurations [12], and task allocation-based
cooperation, where each agent is assigned a subtask based on
efficiency criteria [13].
In this context, the integration of unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) has emerged
as a promising approach for addressing complex challenges

in mobile robotics [14]. This association takes advantage of
the complementary strengths of both platforms, combining
the aerial mobility and wide-view capabilities of UAVs [15]
with the robustness, payload capacity, and precise navigation of UGVs [16]. Such synergy is particularly relevant in
scenarios like search-and-rescue missions [17], environmental
mapping [18], agricultural monitoring [19], and automated
industrial operations [20].
This work proposes a decentralized system in which UAVs
and UGVs operate independently, without direct information
exchange between the platforms. The study explores leaderfollower formation strategies, which can be extended to hunterprey dynamics. In this approach, the UGV acts as the leader,
providing the visual information required for the UAV’s relative localization.
II. M ATERIALS AND M ETHODS
This section is divided into two subsections to provide
a clear overview of the proposed application. The first one
addresses the control of the Pioneer 3-DX robot, manufactured
by Adept MobileRobots®, and the second one focuses on
the control of the Bebop 2 drone, produced by Parrot Inc.®.
It is essential to highlight that the control of both robots is
decentralized and employs a leader-follower formation strategy. In this configuration, the Bebop 2 drone operates as the
follower, relying exclusively on visual information provided by
the Pioneer 3-DX robot. Figure 7 illustrates the experimental
setup, which will be detailed in the subsequent sections.
To demonstrate the decentralized nature of the system, a
laptop was directly connected to the drone’s Wi-Fi network
(yellow), enabling control of the Bebop 2 using Python scripts
developed with the PyParrot library. The ground robot, Pioneer
3-DX, was controlled through an infrastructure comprising a
main computer running the Robot Operating System (ROS),
responsible for publishing and receiving robot data.

*This work was supported by CAPES, FAPEMIG and CNPq.
1 Mr. Rezende, Mr. Pinel and Dr. Brandão are with the Robotics Specialization Center, Department of Electrical Engineering, and Graduate Program on Computer Science, Federal University of Viçosa, Viçosa - MG,
36570-009, Brazil, E-mail: {felipe.rezende, guilherme.pinel,
alexandre.brandao}@ufv.br
979-8-3315-5288-6/25/$31.00©2025 IEEE

Fig. 1: Representation of the experimental setup.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:52:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Additionally, a secondary computer was utilized to process
and compute control signals using MATLAB®. This computer
communicated with the main ROS system (ROS Master)
to transmit control commands and receive odometry data
from the Pioneer 3-DX (green), calculated through velocity
integration using the RosAria library. A Raspberry Pi® served
as an interface between the Pioneer 3-DX and ROS, facilitating
communication and command execution.
A. UGV Control
The control of the Pioneer 3-DX ground robot was implemented by parameterizing desired position functions, as
described in [21]. The implementation leveraged the AuRoRa
framework [22], which integrates a control signal computation
class and the ROS system for publishing control signals and
receiving sensor data. These functions were configured to
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed system in various
scenarios, including linear and curvilinear trajectories. For
better visualization, Equation 1 present the parameterization
for straight while Equation 2, circular paths.
Xd (t) =

t
·d
tmax


2πn
·t
t
 max 
2πn
·t
Yd (t) = r sin
tmax

(1)



Xd (t) = r cos

(2a)
(2b)

Here, tmax represents the total simulation time, and t denotes
the current time. The parameters d and r refer to distances:
for the linear trajectory, d indicates the total displacement
distance, while for the circular path, r represents the curvature
radius. The angular frequency parameter n was introduced to
define the number of revolutions within tmax . Since the desired
points move along the trajectory, their respective velocities
must also be computed, requiring the time derivatives of these
position functions.
The control loop was developed in MATLAB using the AuRoRa platform, aiming to minimize position error. The system
receives the robot’s current position data from ROS, obtained
via velocity integration from sensor readings, and compares it
with the desired position. The error, calculated by subtracting
the received current position from the desired position, is used
as input for the controller proposed in [21], which computes
control signals based on the robot’s parameters. The entire
system operates at a 10 Hz update rate, balancing processing
costs with the Pioneer 3-DX’s sensor and actuator limitations.
B. UAV Control
The PyParrot library was adapted to improve interaction
and response times for controlling the UAV. Given that the
data update frequency for the UAV must be higher, around
33 ms (30 Hz) [23], the image processing must be efficient
enough to avoid interfering with task execution. Specifically,
the image processing time must remain lower than the control
signal update rate.

Within the control loop, the system receives the latest valid
image from the Bebop 2, processes it using color segmentation, and calculates control signals based on position error
in pixels. The UAV then adopts a predator-prey strategy for
aggressive maneuvering, enabling it to land on the platform
located on the UGV (Figure 2a).
1) Color Segmentation: Object segmentation using color
thresholds in images is a widely applied technique in computer vision [24]. The segmentation process for the Flying
Robot Trial League (FRTL) competition platform, depicted in
Figure 2, is described step by step below.
First, the captured image (Figure 2a) is loaded and converted
to the HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value) color space, which
simplifies color-based segmentation. Binary masks are then
generated for blue and yellow colors based on predefined HSV
thresholds. Figures 2b and 2c illustrate the masks obtained for
these thresholds:
(
(
[92, 101, 68]lower
[18, 60, 128]lower
blue =
, yellow =
[126, 255, 221]upper
[32, 255, 236]upper
The blue and yellow masks are combined to form a final
mask (Figure 2d), followed by morphological closing operations to remove noise and fill gaps, resulting in a refined mask
(Figure 2e). Connected components are then identified, and
the component nearest to the control point is selected, with its
center coordinates (cx, cy) highlighted in red (Figure 2f). The
segmentation process is outlined in Algorithm 1.
2) Visual Controller: The coordinates cx and cy, extracted
from the segmentation process in Section II-B1, represent the
target’s position in the image frame. The visual controller
processes these coordinates to generate motion commands for
aligning the UAV with the target.
The target’s position in the drone’s reference frame is
calculated in meters using a calibration constant K, which
converts pixel coordinates into physical units, as expressed by
Algorithm 1 Segmentation and Object Identification
Ensure: Coordinates of the platform center (pixels)
1: Acquire the latest valid image from Bebop 2
2: Convert the image to HSV color space
3: Define thresholds for blue and yellow
4: Generate binary masks based on thresholds
5: Combine blue and yellow masks
6: Apply morphological closing to reduce noise
7: Identify connected components in the refined mask
8: for each connected region do
9:
Calculate area and distance to reference point
10:
if area > minimum threshold and distance is smallest
then
11:
Select the region
12:
end if
13: end for
14:
15: return

Coordinates of the center

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:52:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) Original image used for segmentation.

(b) Binary mask for blue color.

(c) Binary mask for yellow color.

(d) Combined mask for blue and yellow colors.

(e) Final mask after morphological operations.

(f) Identified connected components in the final
mask.

Fig. 2: Segmentation process steps.

K · cx
˜ ·h
K · cy
˜ ·h
, ydB =
(3)
1000
1000
where K was experimentally determined as 2.22 mm/pixel,
based on prior knowledge of the target’s real-world dimensions
and its distance from the UAV. The parameters cx
˜ and cy
˜ represent the errors between the control point and the platform’s
position in the image frame, as shown in
xB
d =

cx
˜ = cxd − cx,

cy
˜ = cyd − cy.

(4)

The desired control point (cxd , cyd ) was set to (300, 428) to
account for the physical displacement of the camera’s field
of view relative to the UAV’s body frame. Only significant
deviations (|cx|
˜ > 20 and |cy|
˜ > 20) are considered for
generating motion commands. This ensures robust and precise
control for aligning the UAV with the target.
III. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
The validation of this study involved performing a comprehensive experiment, available at the following link:
https://youtu.be/2febSiD1dpE. The video demonstrates two
proposed experiments, where the drone is displaced and must
land on a platform attached to the ground robot. In the first

experiment, the Pioneer robot follows a trajectory described
by Equation (1), which corresponds to a linear path. In the
second experiment, it performs a circular trajectory described
by Equation (2). It is worth noting that in both experiments,
the view from the Bebop drone as well as the processed image,
as described in Section II-B1, are displayed.
It is important to emphasize that the position graphs were
generated using the robots’ own odometry. The Pioneer’s
odometry was derived from ROS, while the Bebop’s odometry
was calculated using Python. To better illustrate Experiment 1,
Figure 3 was generated. The figure shows that the drone was
displaced 1.5 meters along the x-axis and the same distance,
but in the opposite direction, along the y-axis. Meanwhile,
the Pioneer traveled a distance d equal to 7 meters along the
positive x-direction. The trajectory followed by the Pioneer
is represented by the red line, while the path traveled by the
Bebop is shown in black. Note that the Bebop’s path ends
before reaching its final position, as the aerial robot performed
a landing in motion.
To provide a deeper analysis of the position error values
observed during visual control in Experiment 1, Figure 4 was
generated. This figure displays both the error magnitude and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:52:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

