2021 15th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Applications (ACOMP) | 978-1-6654-0639-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ACOMP53746.2021.00011

2021 15th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Applications (ACOMP)

Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Automated Agriculture
Kumar Ankit∗ , Shishir N.Y. Kolathaya† , and Debasish Ghose‡
∗ Robert Bosch Center for Cyber Physical Systems (RBCCPS)
† Dept. of Computer Science & Automation and RBCCPS
† Dept. of Aerospace Engineering and RBCCPS
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract—The use of internet-connected devices, especially
small multi-rotor Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), in scientific data gathering and applications is quite widespread. But
due to limited intervention capability, the UAVs alone fail to
automate agricultural tasks completely. Thereby, we propose
a centralized framework capable of handling a heterogeneous
mixture of UAVs and UGVs to cater to the needs of automating
agriculture efficiently. The framework’s core is a novel heuristic
decision module that creates new tasks by visually analyzing
the farm and solves a vehicle routing problem to allocate it to
agents optimally. It is also equipped with supporting modules
to monitor their operation and, in case of failures, help them
recover autonomously based on the task and agent assessment.
The framework is used in three significant agricultural applications, namely yield prediction and drought stress detection
in a simulated environment using ROS and Gazebo, and 3D
mapping of a real farm. These applications demonstrate the
use of the multi-agent collaborative framework in identifying
agricultural tasks on a farm and executing them.

Figure 1.

and controlled to carry out tasks jointly. In this work, we
propose a heterogeneous multi-agent framework employed
in an agricultural setup with UAVs and UGVs to carry out
precision agriculture tasks autonomously.
UAVs and UGVs are being deployed for a diverse range
of applications in precision agriculture. Reduction in waste
and chemical emissions, increased overall efficiency, and
profitability is some of the best-achieved results. In [1], the
authors use a quadrotor with an onboard RGB camera for
crop monitoring, health assessment, and spraying. Software
architecture built to promote reuse, support farms of various
sizes is proposed in [2]. A framework named SmartFarm
[3] integrates environmental sensors present in farms with
a private cloud infrastructure that provides farmers with
a secure, easy-to-use, and cost-effective data analysis system. Similarly, an autonomous multi-sensor UAV system is
proposed for remote sensing, which is adequate for small
fields [4]. An architecture for collective field monitoring by
a group of UAVs is realized in [5]. A swarm of UAVs is
deployed in [6] for spraying fertilizers over agricultural land.
Yield prediction of coffee crops using images from UAVs is
also made in [7]. Indices such as the Normalized difference
vegetation index, which depicts the produce’s health, are
derived from the UAV’s multispectral imagery [8].
We see that the heterogeneous use of both UAVs and
UGVs is a promising combination to be applied that has
been utilised as mobile robot UGVs are used to serve
as a transport and recharge station for the UAVs in [9].
Collaborative mapping of construction sites [10] using both
UAV and UGV is also being done. The use of a heterogeneous swarm of edge UAVs for remote sensing is used in
[11]. Infrastructure-free cooperative relative localisation in
GPS-denied environments [12] can also be realised when
collaborating. A novel collaborative 3D map registration

Keywords-Multi-UAS collaboration; Vision based pick and
place; Task planning; Fault Handling

I. I NTRODUCTION
The world’s population in 2015 stood at 7.3 billion people
and is expected to increase to 8.5 billion by 2030. It requires
a sustainable and efficient farming method to meet the food
demands with constantly decreasing farmlands. Sustainable
farming, also known as precision agriculture, has been in
the limelight in academia since long back but lacks focus
on a completely autonomous solution. With the expansion of
internet-connected devices, new ways to measure and analyze agricultural processes in real-time came into the picture.
Internet of Things (IoT) in agriculture can be considered a
viable solution as it needs constant monitoring and intervention. Using IoT in agriculture needs appropriate software
architecture that plays a prominent role in optimizing the
gain. In the case of IoT, a drone can act as a mobile data
collector and transfer it to a remote station for processing.
In practice also, an aerial vehicle is generally deployed
for data collection and surveillance, whereas most of the
heavy-duty farm operations are carried out by UGVs. Due
to the complexities involved with autonomous agriculture, an
aerial or ground vehicle alone is not sufficient to carry out
agricultural tasks. Hence a common autonomous platform is
necessary that can serve as a framework in which multiple
heterogeneous IoT devices and systems can be incorporated

978-1-6654-0639-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ACOMP53746.2021.00011

a) Original Farm (Left) b) Simulated Farm (Right)

30

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. C OLLABORATIVE M ULTI -AGENT F RAMEWORK

pipeline is presented in [13] for agricultural applications.
Although collaboration among such a heterogeneous agents
has its pitfalls. It needs complex mathematical modelling
approaches to appropriately capture heterogeneity and use
them to plan and allocate tasks optimally. A partitioning
algorithm capturing the heterogeneity of robots in agricultural settings in terms of the speed and onboard power can
be seen in [14]. Then comes the planning of tasks and
navigation of multiple robots, which has been rigorously
studied in recent decades from different perspectives in the
research communities of robotics, control and artificial intelligence. In general, they fall into two types of categories —
centralised and decentralised. Centralised architectures are
prevalent in literature as they guarantee optimality and are
easy to be formalised but suffers exponential computational
complexity whereas, decentralised ones are hard to realise
and sub-optimal but are significantly scalable [15]. Literature
shows decentralised bidding algorithms as in [16] to provide
a fast approximate solution for large-scale systems such as
precision agriculture.
The framework proposed in this paper uses a centralised
architecture with the master as a base station and agents as
slaves. The framework’s core is a heuristic decision module
that creates new tasks, decides, and optimally allocates it to
agents. It monitors the farm and its operations by recording
imagery of the complete farm periodically using agents,
which is then used to detect action zones. Action zones can
be a pest infected area, which requires spraying of pesticides.
This can be carried out by breaking the action of spraying
pesticides into series of trivial sequential tasks like reaching
the spot, detecting infected patch and finally spraying a
calculated volume of chemical. The framework is composed
of modules such as path planner, task scheduler, etc., and
it can be easily integrated with specific modules depending
upon the tasks. This allows the framework to be applied
to most primary agriculture operations, from sowing seed
to harvesting the produce. To demonstrate the framework, a
plantation setting with low-hanging fruits is assumed with
sufficient spacing facilitating effortless traversal of both
aerial and ground vehicles. The collaboration among agents
is currently limited to mapping the farm and carrying out
the tasks simultaneously. More active collaboration scenarios
such as estimating the yield or spraying pesticides cooperatively in real-time can also be made possible using this
framework which will be part of future iterations of the
work. The framework has been deployed in a simulated
agricultural environment based on the actual farm layout,
as shown in Fig. 1.
We discuss our proposed framework in Section 2. Section
3 provides an experimental evaluation to highlight the efficacy of our approach and value due to simplicity. In Section
4, we consider two of the use-cases and simulated the same
in Section 5. Finally, we conclude the paper in section 6
with remarks and discussion on future work.

In this section, we describe the framework and its functional modules:
A. Objective of the Framework
Given n UAVs and m UGVs, the aim is to detect action
zones and deploy these n+m agents to jointly perform their
desired functions in those action zones. The UAVs are
equipped with a camera to capture images. The UGV carries
a 6-DOF manipulator with a sprayer and camera at the endeffector. Periodically, one of the n UAVs and m UGVs are
sent to capture farm’s images cooperatively in an exhaustive
flight path (for example, in a lawnmower pattern) such that
they cover the farm completely. They streams the captured
images back to the central base station, which in our case is
the master. It processes the aerial and ground imagery and
produces a common 3D reconstruction of the farm to detect
action zones and plans the agents’ paths according to the
zone’s requirements and capabilities, creating a route plan.
This generated plan is sent to the task-scheduler module,
which then schedules the tasks and allocates them to all the
agents. The agent then performs the task and creates a report
about the progress and status of the vehicle. The report is
sent to the master to decide and schedule the next task for
the agent.
Furthermore, this framework is also designed to handle
minor faults such as communication loss, agent or task
failure. In such cases, a fault handler module is invoked
on both master and slave to help restore the system. The
architecture and modules are described in detail in the
section below.
B. Components of the Framework
1) Slave Architecture: The proposed architecture (see
Fig. 2) with the necessary modules for agents or slave in
our case is described below:
1) Communication Module: It is responsible for monitoring communication between the master and the agent.
For this, it constantly checks the timestamp of the sent
and received messages to detect any interruptions. If
the connection is broken, the module calls the fault
handler for further help to restore the connection.
2) Agent Handler: It monitors the status of the agent. It
gathers information from various on-board sensors and
generates the status which includes position, battery
health and resources on-board the agent. A tabular
description of agent report is shown in Table 1. The
sub-modules associated with the agent handler are:
a) Localization Module: It fuses the inertial and
global measurements using an extended Kalman
filter to get an estimate of the pose and orientation of the agent.
b) Vision Module: It handles the image stream
captured by the camera sensor and streamed

31
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2.

Slave architecture and its modules

back to the master for further rigorous image
processing to detect the action zones. Image
processing algorithms are designed depending
upon the application.
c) Status/Health Monitoring: It checks whether the
sensors and actuators are operational by going
through some basic calibration routines. It also
monitors the on-board resources such as battery
charge and fertilizer volume.

UGV has to travel across the rows in grid-wise
manner. This sub-module gets the location of
the action zones and helps the agent traverse
the environment while avoiding obstacles and
forbidden zones.
c) Spray: It is designed to precisely spray a controlled volume of water or chemical at a particular area using the on-board camera. Spraying
is done using a 6-DOF manipulator on UGV
with sprayer and camera at the end-effector. It
is actuated based on the visual feedback of the
camera solving an inverse kinematics problem.

Table I
AGENT R EPORT D ESCRIPTION
Particular
Pose
Orientation
Status
Battery Charge
Actuator State
Sensor State
Resource Status

Information
[x, y, z]
[roll, pitch, yaw]
[free/engaged/failed]
Battery Left (%)
Operational or not
Operational or not
Quantity Left

Data Type
[3x1] Array
[3x1] Array
String
Integer
Bool
Bool
Float

Table II
TASK R EPORT D ESCRIPTION
Particular
Task Code
Task Position
Task Progress

3) Task Handler: It is responsible for handling the tasks
sent to the agents. It receives the task and a location
depicting the action zone. Then it uses one of the
below-mentioned task-modules in a sequential manner
to deploy the agent on the task. After which it reports
an assessment back to the master. A tabular description
of task report is shown in Table 2. The sub-modules
associated with the task handler are:
a) Record: It helps the agent record or map a
particular bounded region on the farm. It records
the geo-tagged and timestamped images at an
optimal distance from the crops so as to have the
highest resolution. The recorded imagery is then
streamed back to the master for further analysis.
b) Travel: The UAV can traverse from point to
point at a particular height in air whereas, the

Task Report
Information
Record/Travel/Spray
[x, y, z]
Percentage(%)

Data Type
[3x1] Array
[3x1] Array
Integer

4) Fault Handler: This is invoked onboard when the agent
has lost or has failed. It helps the agent to restore
the communication link or recover from the failure.
The module is in an elementary state where the failure
is fixed by homing the agent and rebooting it. When
rebooted, the agent tries to restore the communication
and is fed with the last incomplete task to resume.
2) Master Architecture: The proposed architecture (see
Fig. 3) with the necessary modules for base station or master
is described below:
1) Communication Module: It operates in the same manner in both the master and the slave architecture.
2) Agent Handler: It handles the information received
from the agent about its health and status. Based on
the report received, it decided whether the agent is

32
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

