2020 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS)
Athens, Greece. September 1-4, 2020

Path-Following with a UGV-UAV Formation Considering that the UAV
Lands on the UGV
Vinı́cius Pacheco Bacheti† , Alexandre Santos Brandão‡ and Mário Sarcinelli-Filho†
following implies that the vehicle (in this case the UGV-UAV
formation) should follow a specified path, but the velocity
can be freely set, whereas in positioning it is zero and
in trajectory-tracking it is defined by the velocity of the
trajectory. Therefore, considering the last step of a package
delivery application, when the drone should land back in
a terrestrial platform (a small truck, for instance), a pathfollowing task fits better to the application than trajectorytracking, as roads constraints, such as red lights and other
cars, may affect the desired velocities in an unpredictable
manner.
To discuss the topics involved, the paper is hereinafter split
in five sections, starting with Section II, which describes the
experimental setup adopted to run the experiments necessary
to validate the proposal, and Section III, in which the
formation UGV-UAV is characterized and described. In the
sequel, Section IV describes the path-following controller
proposed to guide the formation, and Section V shows results
of some real experiments run using the Pioneer 3-DX and
the Bebop 2 vehicles. Finally, Section VI highlights the
conclusions of the work.

Abstract— This paper addresses the control of a formation
composed of an unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) and an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). The formation navigates in
a coordinated way, with the UAV following the UGV while
keeping a relative pose with respect to the UGV as long as the
UGV follows a specified path, so that the UAV can land on the
UGV at any desired instant. This application is conceived in
a context in which the UAV has finished a package delivery
task and comes back to land over a platform used as a base
for the package delivery operation. Experimental results are
presented, which validate the approach adopted to accomplish
such a task.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Unmanned aerial vehicles have been used as an autonomous robot to execute several tasks. Much of these tasks
are related to the capability of collecting top view images,
such as applications involving infrastructure inspection [1],
[2], [3], agricultural inspection [4], [5], load transportation
[6], [7], [8].
More recently applications involving multiple UAVs or
even groups of UAVs and UGVs have been used in many
applications, such as those in [9], [10], [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], just to mention a few, with gain in terms of cost
effectiveness, time to task accomplishment, or even because
of the task to be accomplished itself.
In such a context, this paper addresses the problem of the
joint navigation of a formation composed of a UGV and a
UAV (heterogeneous formation) to follow a predefined path,
with the possibility that the UAV takes-off from the UGV
or lands on it. Notice that this could be part of a task of
package delivery by quadrotors, with the quadrotor departing
from a mobile base to delivery the package, when close
to the package destination, and/or landing back on it after
delivering the package. The approach used is to consider the
UAV and the UGV as a formation (a multi-robot system),
and control the navigation of both vehicles in a coordinated
way.
Notice that this work differs from those reported in [16]
and [17], which deal with tasks of positioning and trajectorytracking, respectively, whereas this work deals with pathfollowing. In this sense it is worth mentioning that path-

II. T HE E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
This section presents the experimental setup used to run
the experiments discussed in Section V. The UGV adopted is
the unicycle-like nonholonomic platform Pioneer 3-DX, from
Adept Mobile Robots, and the UAV is the quadrotor Bebop
21 , from Parrot Drones SAS, which are shown in Figure 1.
The Pioneer 3-DX is a quite versatile small lightweight two-

* This work was supported by CNPq-Brazil and FAPES-ES, Brazil
† V. P. Bacheti and M. Sarcinelli-Filho are with the Graduate Program
on Electrical Engineering, Federal University of Espı́rito Santo, Vitória
- ES, Brazil, where Mr. Bacheti is pursuing a Masters degree and Dr.
Sarcinelli-Filho is a professor vinicius.bacheti@gmail.com,

Fig. 1: Pioneer 3-DX and Bebop 2 with the markers used
for capturing their motion.
wheels differential drive robot used worldwide for education
and research. In this work, in particular, it has a rectangular

mario.sarcinelli@ufes.br
‡

A. S. Brandão is with the Department of Electrical
Engineering, Federal University of Viçosa, Viçosa - MG, Brazil

1 See https://www.parrot.com/us/drones/parrot-bebop-2-power-pack-fpv

alexandre.brandao@ufv.br
978-1-7281-4277-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

488

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

platform over it to allow the landing of the UAV, as it is
shown in Section V. In terms of its kinematics, the Pioneer
3-DX is a differential drive platform, whose control inputs are
the linear velocity v and the angular velocity ω. Its kinematic
model, the one used here, is well known from the literature,
even when using a control point displaced of the virtual axle
linking its driven wheels [18], [19].
As for the Bebop 2 quadrotor, it is a rotorcraft aerial
vehicle originally designed as a toy to be controlled by
smartphones or tablets, mainly for entertainment purposes,
for its quite good video generation capabilities. However, due
to the implementation of a library available in ROS2 (Robot
Operating System), which connects an external computer
with the onboard computer responsible for the low-level
control of such a quadrotor, it is possible to use it as
a platform to run experiments regarding navigation and
guidance.
As for the model of the Bebop 2 quadrotor adopted here, it
is a rotorcraft aerial four-rotor vehicle that moves in response
to changes in the speeds of each rotor. As a consequence
of such changes, four forces arise, one associate to each
propeller, and the inclination of the platform caused by
such changes generates forces in the three directions of
the Cartesian 3D space, and torques around the respective
axes. The combination of such forces and torques makes the
quadrotor fly in any desired direction, with the desired speed,
provided that such velocities stay below the limits imposed
by the manufacturer.
An important aspect of the Bebop 2 quadrotor is that it is
equipped with an autopilot, which is a low-level controller
responsible for controlling the attitude of the vehicle. Such
an autopilot allows the user to limit the pitch and roll angles
(θ and φ), besides the linear velocities and rotational velocity
around its Z axis. For applications in which no aggressive
maneuver is adopted, such as in this work, the user can limit
the pitch and roll angles to small values, thus allowing to
approximate such values by zero values, meaning that the
platform correspondent to the body of the quadrotor is always
in the horizontal position, but is able to develop velocities in
the directions X and Y of the 3D space [20], [21], enabling
the user to send commands that are a four-entries vector
composed by the linear speeds in the three axis and the
angular speed around the Z-axis (yaw velocity).
This vector of commands is, then,
 
uvx
uvy 

u=
 uż  ,
uψ̇

maximum rotational speed, when in the positive direction,
to −1, which corresponds to the same variables when in the
negative direction. As aforementioned, such parameters are
configurable, through the internal autopilot of the Bebop 2. In
this work the maximum value for the pitch and roll angles is
5◦ , the maximum vertical speed is 1m/s and the maximum
rotation speed is 100◦ /s. As for their positive directions, they
are, respectively, front, left, up and counter-clockwise.
It is important to establish these values, as the identified
constants presented at the end of this section are directly
dependent on them.
As a consequence of such simplifications, the simplified
dynamic model proposed in [20] is adopted to represent the
Bebop 2 quadrotor, which is written as
ẍ = f1 u − f2 ẋ.

(1)

Such a model has been shown to be an acceptable approximation for low values of pitch and roll angles, as it is the case
here. In such a model the vector ẍ stands for the accelerations
on the global frame, whereas ẋ is the vector of velocities in
the frame of the vehicle, which are characterized as
 
 
ẍ
ẋ
 ÿ 
 ẏ 

 
ẍ = 
 z̈  , and ẋ =  ż  .
ψ̈
ψ̇
The matrices f1 and f2 , by their turn, are given by

K1 cos ψ
 K1 sin ψ
f1 = 

0
0

K2 cos ψ
 K2 sin ψ

f2 = 
0
0

−K3 sin ψ
K3 cos ψ
0
0

0
0
K5
0

−K4 sin ψ
K4 cos ψ
0
0

0
0
K6
0


0
0
 and
0
K7

0
0
.
0
K8

As for the constants K1 , · · · , K8 that appear in f1 and f2 ,
they were experimentally identified with the help of the high
precision motion capture system OptiTrack3 , configured with
eight cameras, to gather the required data. Once the data
were gathered, the method presented in [22] was adopted
to analyze it and obtain the parameter values. Figure 2
shows the robots in the middle of the working space (an
indoor environment), as well as some of the cameras of the
OptiTrack system around the room. Besides, markers are
used to allow the OptiTrack system to identify the robots,
which can be seen in Figures 1 and 2. The resultant parameter
values are presented in Table I.

where uvx and uvy are velocity commands in the X- and
Y -axis, uż is the velocity command in the Z-axis and uψ̇ is
the command for the yaw velocity.
All these commands are sent to the vehicle as normalized
values, ranging from 1, which corresponds to the maximum
pitch and roll angles, the maximum vertical speed and the

TABLE I: The values identified for the model parameters
K1
0.8417

2 See https://www.ros.org/

K2
0.1823

K3
0.8354

K4
0.1710

K5
3.966

K6
4.001

K7
9.8524

K8
4.7295

3 See https://optitrack.com/motion-capture-robotics/

489
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The variables describing the formation are also shown in
Figure 3, where the index 1 stands for the UGV and the
index 2 stands for the UAV. The variables
correspondent

T
to the positions of the UGV (h1 = x1 y1 z1 ) and
T

the UAV (h2 = x2 y2 z2 ) are grouped in the vector

T

 T
T
= x1 y1 z1 x2 y2 z2 , which
x = h1 hT2
describes the so called robot variables, whereas the variables
T
grouped in the vector q = xf yf zf ρf αf βf
are called formation variables. As previously mentioned,
the
coincides
with  the UGV position, so
 virtual robot
T

T
xf yf zf
= x1 y1 z1 . Thus, two different
spaces are defined, namely the formation space (the cluster
space in [26] and in [19]) and the robots space, which are
connected by two transformations, a direct one, allowing
getting q from x, characterized as
q = f (x),

(2)

and a inverse one, allowing getting x from q, characterized
as
x = f −1 (q).
(3)
An important remark is that when considering the position
of the UGV we are considering a value z1 , which is always
zero in this paper. To consider the variable z1 , however,
allows using this description for a formation of two UAVs,
for instance, what caused the decision of keeping the position
of the UGV as a 3D position.

Fig. 2: Pioneer 3-DX and Bebop 2 with their markers.

III. F ORMATION C HARACTERIZATION
To characterize the UGV-UAV formation considered in
this work the paradigm of virtual structure [23], [24], [25] is
adopted. Such a structure is characterized as a straight line
in the 3D Cartesian space, which is the line segment linking
the two vehicles. According to this paradigm, a virtual
robot is put on a reference point in the geometric element
characterizing the formation. It can be the center of gravity
of the geometric element characterizing the formation, such
as in [26], [27], [18], which, in these works, would be the
middle point of the line linking the UGV and the UAV.
However, as the objective is to propose a control approach
that allows the UAV to land on the UGV, the point of interest
for control, in the present work, will be the extremity of the
virtual line correspondent to the UGV, such as in [24]. Thus,
the formation characterization is the one shown in Figure 3.

IV. T HE PATH -F OLLOWING C ONTROLLER FOR THE
F ORMATION
The control structure adopted in this work is illustrated
in Figure 4, which shows the different layers and how they
interact to allow guiding the formation as a whole.
The goal of a path following task is to reach and follow a
predetermined path with no time constraint. A path is defined
by a parametric function c(s) = (x(s), y(s), z(s)) ∈ R3 ,
where s is the curvilinear abscissa. As the formation in this
paper is based on the UGV, z(s) will always be constant and
equal to zero. The path parametrization layer is responsible
for this, in the proposed control structure. Moreover, once
defined the path is static with respect to time, which allows
the parametrization to be done prior to the navigation, thus
out of the control loop. The control layer, however, still has
to determine the point in the path that is the closest point
to the robot and its distance, as this result will influence
the behavior of the controller. Notice that this is because
the position of the robot with respect to the path is timedependent.
A. Control Layer
The nearest
point between
T the path and the robot is defined

as cn = cnx cny cnz . The distance between cn and

T
xf yf zf
is defined as ñ, where t is the tangential
unitary vector with respect to cn and ψt is the orientation of
t in the reference inertial system.

Fig. 3: Characterizing the UGV-UAV formation.
490

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

