2023 11th International Symposium on Electronic Systems Devices and Computing (ESDC) | 978-1-6654-5572-5/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ESDC56251.2023.10149861

UAV and UGV Assisted Path Planning for Sensor
Data Collection in Precision Agriculture
Himanshu Singh

Moirangthem Biken Singh

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU)
Varanasi, India
himanshusingh.rs.cse21@iitbhu.ac.in

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU)
Varanasi, India
moirangthembsingh.rs.cse21@iitbhu.ac.in

Harsh Pratik

Ajay Pratap

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU)
Varanasi, India
harsh.pratik.cse20@iitbhu.ac.in

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU)
Varanasi, India
ajay.cse@iitbhu.ac.in

Abstract—In recent years, automated (Intelligent) decision
support systems have become prevalent in various smart city
applications such as healthcare, transportation, energy management, and environmental monitoring. Internet of Things (IoT)
and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)-based smart sensing and
actuation devices in agricultural events can change the sector
from static and manual to dynamic and intelligent, resulting in
increased production with minimal human efforts. In addition,
soil measurements that are time-consuming can be collected using
Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs). However, to collect data
efficiently from wireless sensors in agricultural fields, UAV and
UGV need to follow an optimal path. Thus, in this paper, we
formulate utility maximization problem using UAV and UGV by
simultaneously minimizing energy consumption and maximizing
data collection. To solve the formulated problem, we propose
a modified Greedy Randomised Adaptive Search Procedure
(GRASP) algorithm to predict an efficient path for UAV and
UGV to collect data from the agricultural field. Moreover, the
efficacy of the proposed algorithm is showcased theoretically
and experimentally on real-world data and compared with other
state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms—UAV, UGV, Data collection, Agriculture, Sensors.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Unmanned Ground
Vehicles (UGVs) can play a significant role in smart agriculture. By combining the two, farmers can benefit from increased
efficiency, reduced labor costs, and improved crop yields [1]–
[3]. UAVs can be used to gather data on crop health and
growth by using the Agricultural Internet of Things (AIoT)
sensors and cameras to capture images and other data. This
information can then be processed to create maps of the fields,
which can help farmers to identify areas of the crops that are
not growing well, allowing for targeted interventions. UAVs
can also be used to spray pesticides or fertilizers, reducing
the need for manual labor and increasing the precision of the
application. UGVs can be used to collect soil samples and
978-1-6654-5572-5/23/$31.00 © 2023 IEEE

perform other tasks such as irrigation and weed removal. By
using UGVs, farmers can reduce the time and effort required to
carry out these tasks and improve the accuracy and efficiency
of their operations. Together, UAVs and UGVs can provide
a comprehensive solution for smart agriculture. By collecting
data on crop health and soil conditions, farmers can make
informed decisions on using fertilizers, pesticides, and other
interventions. This can help to reduce costs, increase crop
yields, and improve the overall sustainability of agricultural
practices.
A UAV or UGV (or a group of them) needs to visit various
locations in the agricultural field to collect data from agricultural sensors [4]. Due to the limited storage capacity and data
overwriting problem, the data from the sensors should be collected after a certain time interval [5]–[11]. However, efficient
path prediction is required to minimize energy consumption
during flight and hovering while collecting data from the
sensors. Furthermore, certain parameters of soil measurements
require significant amounts of time during their collection.
Employing UGVs to cover these sensor areas is more efficient
than using UAVs. Furthermore, after data collection, UAV and
UGV return to the data center residing in the middle of the
agricultural field for further processing.
To tackle the above-mentioned problem, we propose UAV
and UGV-based data collection as utility maximization problems by minimizing the energy consumption of UAV and UGV
as given in Fig. 1. Moreover, we show that the formulated
problem is similar to the well-known NP-hard Orienteering
Problem (OP). To solve the formulated problem in an efficient
way, we propose a modified Greedy Randomised Adaptive
Search Procedure (GRASP) [12] algorithm to predict the path
for both UAV and UGV. The primary contributions of this
paper are summarized in the following:
1) Formulate the problem of collecting data from agricultural field sensors using UAVs and UGVs as a utility
maximization problem by minimizing energy consump-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

tion while collecting data, as an NP-hard problem.
2) Solve the formulated problem efficiently using a modified GRASP algorithm by finding an efficient path for
both UAV and UGV and maximizing the amount of data
collection.
3) Through simulation study on real-world data, we have
demonstrated that the proposed approach outperforms
the state-of-the-art schemes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
reviews relevant works. The system model and the problem
formulation are introduced in Section III. The proposed solution and performance study are discussed in Sections IV
and V, respectively. Section VI offers conclusions and future
works.

TABLE I: Summary of related works
Problem
Focus

Path
Prediction

Utility
Maximization

UAV
+
UGV

LoRa

Utility Maximization [4]

✓

✓

×

×

GRASP [12]

✓

×

×

×

Sensor Planning [13]

✓

×

✓

×

Precision Agriculture [14]

×

×

×

✓

VNS [15]

✓

✓

×

×

Proposed approach

✓

✓

✓

✓

II. R ELATED W ORKS
This section provides a comparison of closely related works
in the literature, as shown in Table I. Authors of [4], proposed
a utility maximization problem to maximize data collection
by optimizing UAV’s path. The authors introduced a utility
function and maximized the utility through various potential
hovering locations to get an optimized trajectory for the
UAV. However, they did not consider the deployment of
UGV, focusing solely on the UAV’s trajectory. The authors
of [12] discussed Close Enough OP (CEOP), which focused
on finding the most rewarding route visiting different regions
based on the given travel budget using the GRASP algorithm.
However, they did not take into account utility maximization
for UAV and UGV models. The authors of [13], described
a sensor planning scheme based on the path of the UGV by
minimizing a cost function. The authors showed that UGV
carries UAV to different points, and then UAV collects data.
However, the authors did not consider the utility maximization
problem for the trajectory. The authors of [14], conducted
an analytical study that examined the proximity at which a
drone equipped with a LoRa radio had to fly over sensors in
order to achieve a specific level of data collection quality.
However, the authors did not consider path prediction and
utility maximization in their proposed model. The authors of
[15], formulated OP for curvature-constrained vehicles. They
proposed the Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) technique
and attempted to maximize rewards while ensuring the tour
length adhered to a specified travel budget restriction.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We consider a combined UAV and UGV model with MEC
server as a data center for agricultural data collection, as shown
in Fig. 1. The data transmission from AIoT sensors to UAV
or UGV uses LoRa transceivers. Let = {1, · · · , s, · · · , S},
= {1, · · · , g, · · · , G} and
= {1, · · · , a, · · · , A} be the
sets of all AIoT sensors in the field, AIoT sensors to be
covered by the UGV, and the AIoT sensors to be covered
by the UAV, respectively. UAV and UGV cover different parts
of the agricultural field to collect data from AIoT sensors by
finding near-optimal paths. Both UAV and UGV start from the
data center located in the middle of the field. After collecting

G

A

S

UAV

Data center

UGV

AIoT sensors to be covered by UAV
AIoT sensors to be covered by UGV
Fig. 1: System model.

data, UAV and UGV return to the data center on each tour.
A closed data collection tour of the UAV starts and ends at
the data center, consisting of a sequence of hovering locations
at altitude h, visited by the UAV to collect agricultural data.
However, it is not feasible to collect all the data in a single tour
due to energy constraints. Thus, multiple tours are conducted
by the UAV and UGV to gather data from the AIoT sensors
located throughout the fields1 .
A. Path Planning
Assuming that the data center is situated at the center of
the agricultural field, the data collection process is done by
deploying UAV and UGV for collecting data from the sensors,
which can be described as follows:
1) We assume a random path as the initial path.
2) Other hovering locations are injected into the path until
the cost is under the budget.
1 As the quantity of orchards requiring data management expands, there is
a proportional increase in both the number of data centers needed to handle
the workload and the frequency of UAV and UGV tours.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3) Once a tour is found, a local search algorithm gets
initiated to ensure a near-optimal tour.
4) Once a near-optimal tour has been obtained, all the
locations in the set of hovering locations that are not
part of this tour are removed.
B. Data Collection Tour Model
In the proposed model, UAV and UGV start from the data
center and return to the data center after collecting data from
AIoT sensors in each tour.
1) UAV: A tour of the UAV consists of a sequence of
hovering locations at an altitude of h above the ground. Let
be the set of H hovering locations as given by:

H

H = {(x1, y1, h), · · · , (xa, ya, h), · · · , (xH, yH, h)},

(1)

where (xa , ya , h) is the hovering coordinate for the UAV to
collect data from AIoT sensor a. Then, the total flight distance
fd for the UAV with total flight duration Γ, travelling with the
speed of vU AV in a tour is given as follows:
fd = vU AV × Γ.

(2)

Thus, the UAV can travel to a hovering location (xa , ya , h)
and back to the data center only if x2a + ya2 + h2 ≤ R2 , where
R = f2d . Let td = DBa be the time taken by the UAV to collect
data from ath sensor, where Da is the data size at sensor a,
and B is the channel bandwidth [14]. Then, the hovering time
Ψa for each hovering location is given below:
Ψa = min(td , tDC ),

(3)

where tDC is the duty cycle of LoRa trans-receiver [14].
The distance that the UAV travels from its current location
to the next hovering location is given as follows:
p
da′ ,a = (xa − xa′ )2 + (ya − ya′ )2 ,
(4)
where (xa , ya ) and (xa′ , ya′ ) are the next and the current
hovering coordinates for UAV. The time required for the UAV
to travel and collect data from sensor a is calculated as follows:
da′ ,a
Ta =
+ Ψa .
(5)
vU AV
However, due to energy constraints, UAV cannot collect data
from all sensors during a single tour. Therefore, the UAV
should prioritize more important hovering locations over others.
2) UGV: A UGV tour consists of a series of locations
where transmissions occur. The set
contains coordinates
of UGV for collecting data from sensors in , as follows:

N

G

N = {(x1, y1), · · · , (xg , yg ), · · · , (xN , yN )},

(6)

where (xg , yg ) is the coordinate corresponds to AIoT sensor
g.
Assuming vU GV is the velocity of the UGV, the distance
between the current location (xg′ , yg′ ) and the next location
(xg , yg ) is calculated as follows:
dg′ ,g = |(xg − xg′ )| + |(yg − yg′ )|.

(7)

Suppose Ψsamp
represents the time needed to sample the data
g
at (xg , yg ). Then, Ψsamp
is calculated as [14]:
g
Dg
,
B
where Dg denotes the data size collected by sensor g.
Ψsamp
=
g

(8)

C. Data Collection Utility Model
The quantity of data gathered by a sensor on a UAV
or UGV is directly linked to the duration of the hovering
or transmission associated with the sensor. We express the
amount of data collected from sensor s during a period of
time t using a function Fs (t) as follows [4]:
1) Fs (t) = 0 if t = 0; Fs (t) > 0 if 0 < t ≤ Ψ; otherwise
Fs (t) = Fs (Ψ) if t > Ψ.
2) Function Fs (t) is non-decreasing, i.e. Fs (t1 ) ≤ Fs (t2 )
for 0 ≤ t1 < t2 .
3) Fs (t) is a sub modular function, where Fs (t1 + ∆) −
Fs (t1 ) > Fs (t2 + ∆) − Fs (t2 ) for 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ Ψ
and Fs (t1 + ∆) − Fs (t1 ) = Fs (t2 + ∆) − Fs (t2 ) for
Ψ ≤ t1 < t2 .
where Ψ = Ψa when UAV is considered and Ψ = Ψsamp
g
while assuming UGV.
1) UAV: Let the priority of all hovering locations in
is
given by the set U AV = {P1 , · · · , Pa , · · · , PH }, where Pa
is the priority of the hovering location (xa , ya , h). Next, we
define utility ua of the UAV at hovering location (xa , ya , h)
as follows:
ua = Fa (Ψa ) × Pa .
(9)

H

P

Hence, the overall utility of the UAV is expressed as follows:
X
UU AV =
ua .
(10)
(xa ,ya ,h)∈

H

Let the set of potential UAV tours is denoted by τ =
{τ0 , · · · , τm , · · · , τM }, and the energy consumption of the
UAV per unit time during tour τm be ∆EUmAV . The cost of
collecting data from sensor a on tour τm by UAV is given as
follows:
ca,m = ∆EUmAV × Ta .

(11)

Thus, the total cost of UAV for travelling to each hovering
location in the tour is defined as follows:
X
CU AV =
ca,m .
(12)

P

(xa ,ya ,h)∈τm ,τm ∈τ

2) UGV: Let U GV = {P0 , · · · , Pg , · · · , PH }, where Pg
is the priority of transmission location at (xg , yg ). We define
the utility of the UGV at transmission location (xg , yg ) as
follows:
ug = Fg (Ψg ) × Pg .
(13)
Thus, the total utility of UGV is calculated as follows:
X
UU GV =
ug .
(14)
(xg ,yg )∈

N

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

