6996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 7, JULY 2022

Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)-Assisted Path
Planning for Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) via
Disciplined Convex-Concave Programming
Guanchong Niu , Lan Wu, Yunfan Gao , and Man-On Pun , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The last decade has witnessed growing research interests in the path-planning problem for unmanned ground vehicles
(UGVs) equipped with RGB-D cameras or LiDARs. However, apart
from their extremely high cost, these sensors may be obscured
by obstacles, which makes them impractical for many complex
scenarios. Besides, most of the existing works for path planning
have not considered energy efficiency for UGVs that are usually
constrained by limited on-board batteries. Distinct from existing
methods, this work presents a vision-based unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-assisted cooperative system for multiple UGVs. The
proposed system harnesses the broad vision of UAV and operates in
both general outdoor and global positioning system (GPS)-denied
indoor environments. In sharp contrast to the conventional heuristic algorithms such as the rapidly exploring random tree (RRT)
algorithm and the Dijkstra methods, the proposed energy-efficient
path planning for UGVs is formulated as a non-convex optimization
problem by considering the collision-aware obstacle-avoidance.
More specifically, the proposed path-planning scheme contains two
stages, namely the semantic segmentation that localizes UGVs and
obstacles in the environment by exploiting the wide-angle camera
mounted on the UAV, followed by the trajectory generation in which
a disciplined convex and concave programming (DCCP) algorithm
is devised for the non-convex energy-minimization problem. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the UAV-UGV
cooperative system and the proposed DCCP-based path-planning
scheme.
Index Terms—Disciplined convex-concave programming, path
planning, semantic segmentation, UAV-UGV cooperative system.

I. INTRODUCTION

P

ATH planning, as a critical component for intelligent
mobile robots and automatic pilots, is expected to identify

Manuscript received October 14, 2021; revised February 26, 2022; accepted
April 13, 2022. Date of publication April 19, 2022; date of current version
July 18, 2022. This work was supported in part by the Shenzhen Science
and Technology Innovation Committee under Grant JCYJ20190813170803617,
and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61731018. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Hamid Taghavifar.
(Corresponding author: Man-On Pun.)
Guanchong Niu and Man-On Pun are with the School of Science, Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China, and
with the Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen 518172, China,
and also with the Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
216019007@link.cuhk.edu.cn; SimonPun@cuhk.edu.cn).
Lan Wu is with the School of Science, Engineering, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China (e-mail: lanwu1@link.cuhk.edu.cn).
Yunfan Gao is with the School of Science, Engineering, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172, China, and also with the
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen 518172, China (e-mail:
yg2744@columbia.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2022.3168574

the possible collisions before generating energy-efficient
trajectories to avoid obstacles for unmanned ground vehicles
(UGVs). For instance, UGVs serving as a community policing
should have the capability of recognizing stochastic obstacles
scattered on the road. Besides, meticulous path planning for
collision avoidance among multiple UGVs is also highly
demanded. For a UGV to detect obstacles and the other UGVs,
range- and appearance-based methods are the two major
solutions by applying LiDAR [1] and RGB-D camera [2],
respectively. Unfortunately, the performance of these two
solutions is not always satisfactory. First, both RGB-D and
LiDAR sensors are expensive, which incurs high costs if they are
equipped on each UGV individually. Second but importantly,
RGB-D and LiDAR sensors suffer from a limited view angle
when applied to scenarios of large-scale obstacles [3], [4].
To cope with these challenges aforementioned, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been recently proposed as an
efficient solution to this problem [5]. This UAV-assisted
approach outperforms existing methods in the following
aspects:
r Low Cost: A typical commercial UAV of less than
US$3000 is capable of serving multiple UGVs
simultaneously;1
r Long-range Detection: A UAV with a wide-angle camera
can detect objects from a far distance. For instance, the DJI
MAVIC2 can achieve the furthest detection range of 180
meters using its built-in camera;2
r Real-time Communications: The video stream and photos
taken by a UAV can be transmitted back in real-time, which
supports latency-sensitive applications such as automatic
piloting;
r Line-of-sight (LoS) Transmissions: The wireless channel
between the UAV and UGVs under coverage is LoS
at most time, which enables efficient wireless data
communications.
Motivated by the advantages above, this work proposes an efficient UAV-UGV cooperative system for path planning available
in both indoor and outdoor environments. With the assistance of
one UAV, a path-planning algorithm is developed for multiple
1 [Online]: Available. https://store.dji.com/shop/mavic-series?from=menu_
icon
2 [Online]: Available. https://www.dji.com/products/compare-consumerdrones

0018-9545 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NIU et al.: UAV-ASSISTED PATH LEARNING FOR UGVS VIA DISCIPLINED C-C PROGRAMMING

6997

Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed UAV-UGV cooperative system for indoor and outdoor scenarios. (a) Obstacle-avoidance system for a single UGV. (b)
Collision-aware obstacle-avoidance system for multiple UGVs.

UGVs in this work. Unlike [6], this work takes into account
the detection of UGVs as well as collision avoidance among
UGVs. More specifically, the proposed algorithm is divided into
two stages, namely the semantic segmentation and the trajectory
generation. In the first stage, obstacles and UGVs can be identified and localized using semantic segmentation techniques by
exploiting the wide-view camera mounted on the UAV. For the
second stage of trajectory generation, the path-planning problem is mathematically formulated as a non-convex optimization
problem before the disciplined convex and concave programming (DCCP) technique is applied to solve the problem [7].
In sharp contrast to the conventional heuristic algorithms such
as machine learning (ML)-based methods, the proposed path
planning algorithm aims to develop a non-convex optimization
problem in which the potential collisions among obstacles and
UGVs are explicitly modeled and resolved. In particular, the
proposed algorithm does not require a training procedure. As
a result, this low-cost and robust algorithm can be practically
implemented in real-life applications such as post-earthquake
rescues in indoor environment [8].
Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed UAV-UGV cooperative system in which multiple UGVs (cars or robots) are served by
one UAV in indoor and outdoor scenarios. The UAV equipped
with a camera takes photos and videos to capture the ground
UGVs and obstacles. For the outdoor scenarios, the global
position can be directly acquired by the GPS equipped on
the UAV. In contrast, additional sensors such as TFmini Plus
can be equipped on the UAV to obtain the height information in the GPS-denied indoor scenarios. Furthermore, collision
and obstacle avoidance are considered in generating the UGV
trajectories as shown in Fig. 2. More specifically, given an
input image captured by the UAV, the objects are first extracted using semantic segmentation. After that, the detected
objects are represented by circular approximation, which enables the path-planning optimization problem to be mathematically formulated as a convex-concave optimization problem.
Finally, the energy-efficient trajectory is generated using a
DCCP-based algorithm by solving the non-convex optimization
problem.

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the proposed algorithm. In the first step, the objects are
detected and segmented. Next, the problem is mathematically formulated and
solved using DCCP-based algorithm.

In summary, the main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
r A UAV-UGV cooperative system consisted of one UAV
and multiple UGVs is constructed, operating under the
indoor and outdoor environments. In contrast to RGB-D
and LiDAR-based systems, fewer sensors are required for
UGVs in the proposed system. One UAV is sufficient to
serve multiple UGVs at the same time.
r A novel shape representation scheme for detected objects
is proposed to mathematically formulate the obstacles and
UGVs using multiple uniform circles. These representations are then converted into convex-concave constraints.
After that, the collision-aware obstacle-avoidance problem
is formulated as a classical energy minimization problem
that can be efficiently solved via a proposed DCCP-based
algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 71, NO. 7, JULY 2022

r Both computer simulation and experiment results confirm
the effectiveness of the proposed path planning algorithm
as compared to the conventional heuristic algorithms such
as the Rapidly Exploring Random Tree (RRT) algorithm
and Dijkstra methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the related literature on semantic segmentation and
path planning is reviewed. Then, the UAV-assisted semantic
segmentation is presented in Section III. After that, the
energy-minimization problem is formulated as a non-convex
optimization problem before a DCCP-based solution is
proposed in Section IV. Finally, extensive computer simulation
and experiment results are presented in Section VI before
conclusion is given in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. UAV-Assisted Semantic Segmentation
The goal of semantic segmentation is to segment the image
taken by the UAV before recognizing its content. Driven by the
rapid advances of the deep learning technology, especially the
convolutional neural network (CNN), the semantic segmentation
technology based on deep learning has made great progress.
Many pioneering works have been proposed in the literature
to solve the problem of semantic segmentation [9]. However,
such deep learning-based methods require prohibitively expensive computational complexity. As a result, it is impossible to
practically implement these algorithms for real-time semantic
segmentation.
In the meantime, it has been recently demonstrated that UAVs
possess many unique merits such as flexible mobility, low cost,
and high portability, which makes UAVs a promising solution
to large-area ground survivance [10]. For instance, commercial
UAVs have been used to investigate the rice lodging in paddies
over a large area by exploiting FCN-AlexNet for semantic
segmentation [11]. Compared to the remote sensing images from
satellites [12], more detailed information of a higher spatial
resolution can be collected by UAVs.
Recently, [13] presents a segmentation model called
YOLACT3 that excels in both accuracy and frames per second
(FPS) using a single GPU. Furthermore, an improved version
of YOLACT called YOLACT++ is developed in [14] to devise
a more accurate segmentation model by adding a new mask
re-scoring branch and deformable solutions to the backbone
network. As YOLACT++ can achieve the highest accuracy at
33.5 FPS in real-time, it has been envisioned as a promising
solution to object segmentation operated on UAVs.
B. Collision-Aware Obstacle-Avoidance Path Planning
Generally speaking, the path-planning algorithms for UGVs
can be categorized into two groups, namely the graph-based and
the ML-based approaches. For the graph-based approach, the
geometry-based and the probability-oriented methods have been
extensively investigated in the literature. For instance, the most
3 You Only Look At CoefficienTs

representative geometry-based methods include the Dijkstra
method, the RoadMap-based visibility graph [15], the Voronoi
diagram [16], and the exact cell decomposition (ECD) [17].
Furthermore, the most celebrated probability-oriented methods
are the probabilistic RoadMap (PRM) [18] and RRT [19]. On
the other hand, the ML-based methods, including the genetic
algorithm (GA) [20], particle swarm optimization (PSO) [21]
and deep learning (DL)-based algorithms, attract more and more
attention in recent years. In general, a training procedure is
demanded with the assistance of the existing dataset for these
ML-based methods.
Extending to the multi-UGV path planning system, collision
avoidance among multiple UGVs requires closer examination
related to a more complex constraint description. The authors
in [22] adopt the wait-strategy, where the UGV of lower priority
is ordered to wait temporarily if two UGVs are collision-prone.
Similarly, the path of the lower-priority UGV is planned to
bypass the other UGVs, avoiding potential collisions. Despite
that a predictive perception model is proposed in [23], the system
can only predict possible future lane changes of the competing vehicles. In [24], a mixed-integer programming approach
is developed by specifically taking into account the real-time
collision problem while modeling the trajectory-generation process as constraints. However, due to the restriction of linear
programming, these constraints are usually limited by a convex
feasible set.
III. UAV-ASSISTED INDOOR AND OUTDOOR SEMANTIC
SEGMENTATION
Empowered with the wide-view superiority, UAVs can be
effectively employed to control the UGVs on the ground. In
the proposed UAV-UGV cooperative system, YOLACT++ is
adopted on a UAV to detect and segment ground objects for
both indoor and outdoor scenarios.
A. Semantic Segmentation by YOLACT++
1) Dataset for UAV Imagery: At present, several public semantic segmentation data sets are available online. However,
most of them only focus on the common objects captured from
the ground, such as Ms-COCO [25] and Pascal VOC [26]. There
are very few high-resolution semantic segmentation datasets
based on UAV imagery. To cope with this problem, a dataset
has been developed from a vertical view of UAV for semantic
segmentation. In the dataset, 100 high-resolution images are
labeled with five object classes, namely Turtlebots, Cars, Pedestrians, Suitcases (acting as obstacles) and Roads. The scenes
mainly focus on outdoor highways and indoor corridors, which
is suitable for the automatic piloting of UGVs.
2) Real-Time Semantic Segmentation: Despite the great success of utilizing LiDAR and RGB-D cameras in object detection
and segmentation, their high cost makes them prohibitively
unaffordable to be equipped on each UGV on the ground.
To circumvent this obstacle, a UAV-assisted cooperative system is proposed with one regular UAV being used to realize
collision-aware obstacle-avoidance path planning for multiple
UGVs. Particularly, YOLACT++ is used to identify objects and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

