2020 5th International Conference on Advanced
Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM)

A Two-level Memetic Path Planning Algorithm for Unmanned
Air/Ground Vehicle Cooperative Detection Systems
Lijia Ma, Xiaopeng Huang, Jie Chen, Jianqiang Li, and Tao Sun
Abstract— The Unmanned Air/Ground Vehicle (UAV/UGV)
cooperative detection systems are widely used in terrain reconnaissance, disaster rescue and urban/rural buildings survey,
in which the UAV in the air can provide a broad view and
take photography, while the UGV on the ground can offer
sufﬁcient load capacity and serve as repeater stations as well.
The path planning of UAV/UGV is one of the most important
issues in the cooperative detection system, and its studies have
attracted great attentions in recent years. In this study, a twolevel memetic path planning algorithm is proposed to help
the unmanned air/ground vehicle cooperative systems detect
realistic urban illegal building, considering the limits of the endurance capacity of the UAV, the load capacity of the UGV, and
the communication restrictions between them. Experiments on
both the synthetic data and the realistic urban illegal building
data show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm on solving
the path planning problem in the UAV/UGV cooperative system
for urban illegal building detection tasks.

The path planning is one of the most common but important issues in UAV/UGV cooperative systems for real tasks
in the presence of the limits of the endurance capacity of the
UAV, the load capacity of the UGV, the obstacles and the
communication restrictions [14]–[16]. Most of the existing
works mainly focus on the path planning of either UAVs
or UGVs, see the comprehensive review in [17]. Recently,
some works have been proposed for the path planing in
both UAVs and UGVs in real tasks. For instance, in the
target tracking mission, Yu et al. [6] considered the path
planning as a probability maximization problem by modeling
the moving target state as the dynamic occupancy grid. In
the reconnaissance mission, Manyam et al. [18] developed a
mixed integer linear programming (MILP) algorithm with a
branch-and-cut strategy to plan the paths for the UAV and
UGV, considering the communication constraints between
the aerial and ground vehicles. In the autonomous package
delivery tasks, Mathew et al. [19] solved a shortest path
planning problem under the limitations that the truck can
only drive on the existing street and the quadrotor should
visit all the given locations to deliver packages. Actually,
the path planing problem of UAV/UGV cooperative systems
can be generalized to the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP)
[20] in the presence of some limits for real tasks, and it can
be solved by some classic heuristic algorithms, such as the
ant colony algorithm [21], the simulated annealing algorithm
[22], the genetic algorithm [23] and the memetic algorithm
[24].
In this paper, we study the path planning of the UAV/UGV
cooperative systems with camera for the detection of nonstandard buildings in cities. The UAV has the advantages
in speed and vision, while the UGV has the advantages
in capability and stability. Moreover, the UAV is generally
limited by its energy and load capability, while the UGV
is limited by its speed and vision. In a city, the buildings
that need to be detected are widely distributed into a large
area, and their non-standard objects are located in different
heights. Although some works about the path planning of
UAV or UGV detection systems has been proposed, the path
planning of UAV/UGV cooperative systems remains to be
unsolved. Moreover, the traditional UAV or UGV detection
systems cannot work well for the detection of non-standard
buildings in cities due to their limits.
To detect non-standard buildings in cities, we propose a
UAV/GAV cooperative detection system. In this system, the
UGV can carry the UAV and meanwhile charge the drone
automatically, while the UAV can take a photo for the nonstandard buildings from an aerial perspective. Moreover, we

Unmanned Air/Ground Vehicle, cooperative detection systems, path planning, memetic algorithm
I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, the studies on the Unmanned Air/Ground
Vehicle (UAV/UGV) cooperative detection systems have attracted great attentions due to their wide applications on both
military and civilian ﬁelds, such as terrain reconnaissance
[1]–[3], border patrol [4], [5], target tracking [6], [7] and
disaster rescue [8], [9]. The UAVs in the air have a fast
ﬂight speed and broad vision, which can quickly negotiate
obstacles and traverse multiple locations. The UGVs on
the ground have a good endurance capability and stability,
which can load supplies and travel a long distance [10]. The
cooperation of UAVs and UGVs can comprehensively realize
their advantages on the realistic complicated tasks in terms
of speed, vision, capability and stability.
The UAV/UGV cooperative systems [9], [11] consist of
independent cooperative unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) and the control center,
aiming to coordinate the UAVs and UGVs to complete realistic tasks while maintaining the communication restrictions
between the vehicles and the control center [12], [13]. For
instance, in a task of disaster relief, UAVs obtain the geomorphic information and send the aerial map to the ground
monitoring center, while UGVs provide relief supplies to the
disaster area based on the aerial map and the path planing
generated by the ground monitoring center [9].
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China {Corresponding author: Jianqiang Li
(lijq@szu.edu.cn).}
Corresponding author: Jianqiang Li (lijq@szu.edu.cn).

978-1-7281-6479-3/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

25

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 5th International Conference on Advanced
Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM)

propose a two-level memetic path planning algorithm (called
as Two-MA) to help the UAV/GAV system detect realistic
urban illegal building, considering the limits of the endurance
capacity of the UAV, the load capacity of the UGV, and
the communication restrictions between them. Two-MA ﬁrst
adopts a K-means algorithm to divide the buildings in cities
into clusters, in which the buildings in the same clusters are
closer than those in different clusters. Then, Two-MA uses
the concept of hierarchical path planning, in which the UGV
executes the global path planning across different clusters
while the UAV executes the local path planning of buildings
in the same clusters. Experiments on both the simulated data
and the real data demonstrate the effectiveness of the twoMA algorithm.

6WDUW
&OXVWHULQJDQDO\VLVRIWKHORFDWLRQLQIRUPDWLRQ
3DWK3ODQQLQJIRUFRRSHUDWLYH8$9DQG8*9
8*9FDUULHV8$9WRWKHVWDUWLQJSRVLWLRQLQVWDUWLQJFOXVWHU
1R

8$9FROOHFWVLQIRUPDWLRQZLWKLQWKHFOXVWHUWKHQUHWXUQVWR8*9
8*9FDUULHV8$9WRWKHQH[WVWDUWLQJSRVLWLRQLQQH[WFOXVWHU

7KHFXUUHQWSRVLWLRQ
KDVYLVLWHG"

II. R ELATED BACKGROUNDS

<HV
7HUPLQDWH

A. The UAV/UGV cooperative system
The UAV/UGV cooperative system consists of UAVs,
UGVs and a control center. The UAVs perform aerial
photography in the air, while the UGVs execute loading
and transportation on the ground. Moreover, the UGV can
serve as the take off and landing for the UAV. The control
center executes the compute-intensive tasks such as data
transmission, data processing, task scheduling and vehicles
coordinating. For instance, in the intelligence surveillance
and reconnaissance (ISR) mission, the control center ﬁrst
plans the path and dispatchs asynchronous tasks for the
UAV and UGV, then processes the data transmitted from
UAV/UGV to give further instructions. A comprehensive
survey for the UAV/UGV cooperative system is shown in
[25]. An experimental cooperative UAV/UGV cooperative
system is shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 2: Framework of the system model.

T SP (G) = min (

Di Di+1 + DN D1 ),

(1)

i=1

in which Di Di+1 represents the distance from a build i to
a building i + 1 in cities for the task of detection of nonstandard buildings.
III. M ODELS AND M ETHODS
In this part, we introduce the heterogeneous multirobot
team with cooperative UAV and UGV to complete tasks of
detection of non-standard buildings in cities.
The whole framework of the cooperative system is shown
in Fig. 2. Generally, the operations of the systems consists
of three steps: clustering analysis, path planning for the UAV
and the path planning for the UGV.
Step 1) Clustering analysis. Generally, the buildings in
a cite are widely distributed into a large area, and their nonstandard objects are located in different heights. To quickly
ﬁnd a good path, we ﬁrst divide the areas with buildings
into a set of clusters, in which the buildings in the same
cluster are close whereas those in different clusters are far.
Here, we choose the K-means clustering algorithm [26] to
generate clusters for buildings based on the Global Position
System (GPS) data. The reason for choose K-mean clustering
algorithm is that it can can achieve a good tradeoff between
the clustering effect and the time complexity.
Considering the limits of the endurance capacity of the
UAV, the load capacity of the UGV, and the communication
restrictions between them, we use the UAV to gather image
information of the buildings for further analyses within the
cluster, and use and the UGV to carry the UAV to traverse
different clusters.
Step 2) Path planning for the UAV.

Fig. 1: A real UAV/UGV cooperative system for experiments.
B. Path planning in UAV/UGV cooperative systems
Here, the path planning problem in UAV/UGV cooperative
system aims to ﬁnd the shortest path from a given position
to a destination position which passes through all buildings.
This problem can be modeled as a typical travelling salesman
problem (TSP) [20] which is a classical NP-hard problem.
Given n possible positions, the path planning problem
aims to ﬁnd a possible path G across the n positions, so as to
minimize the distance of the paths. It can be mathematically
described as follows.
978-1-7281-6479-3/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

N
−1


26

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 5th International Conference on Advanced
Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM)

Algorithm 1 K-Means clustering algorithm

The UAV within a cluster starts from the center of a
cluster, and then passes through the rest of positions. Finally,
it returns to the center of the cluster. Therefore, the path
planing of the UAV can be modeled as a traveling salesman
problem (TSP) from the node novel, which needs to ﬁnd a
shortest path that travels all nodes in a cluster. To solve this
TSP problem, we propose a memetic algorithm which is a
combination of a genetic algorithm [23] and a local search.
Step 3) Path planning for the UGV. The UGV aims
to carry the UAV across different clusters. In this case,
the path planning for the UGV across different clusters
can be modeled as the TSP problem for the cluster level.
Speciﬁcally, the path planning problem for the UGV aims
to ﬁnd a shortest path that travels the centers of all clusters.
To solve the TSP problem in the cluster level, we adopt the
proposed memetic algorithm for the path planning of UAV
when we set each cluster as a super node.
Step 4) Geographic information collection. Based on
the planned paths for the UAV and UGV, the heterogeneous
cooperative system collects the geographic information of the
buildings as follows. First, the UVA carries the UAV to the
center of a cluster. Then, the UAV collects the information
of the buildings within the cluster based on the UAV path.
Next, the UGV carries the UAV to the next cluster based
on the UGV path. The steps above are executed until all
information of the buildings are collected.
A graphical representation of the whole system is given
in Fig. 3.

1: Input: The number of clusters: k; The maximum number

of iteration: Imax ; The original dataset: G.

2: E ← InitializeCentroids(G, k);
3: repeat
4:
C ← PartitionClusters(E);
5:
Enew ← RecomputationCentroids(G,C);
6:
E ← UpdateCentroids(G,Enew );
7: until TerminationCriterion(Imax )
8: Output: The k centroids E and cluster divisions C.

Algorithm 2 Framework of Two-MA for path planing
1: Input: Position indexes: C; Population size: Spop ; Max-

imum number of generations: Gmax ; Crossover probability: Pc ; Mutation probability: Pm ; The size of mating
pool: Nm ; the tournament size: Nt ;
2: P ← Initialization(C, Spop );
3: repeat
4:
Pparent ← Selection(P, Nm , Nt );
5:
Pchild ← GeneticOperation(Pparent , Pc , Pm , Nt );
6:
Pnew ← LocalSearch(Pchild );
7:
P ← UpdatePopulation(Pnew );
8: until The current iteration reaches Gmax .
9: Output: Convert the ﬁttest chromosome in P into the
path of UAV/UGV.

data are collected by the Global Positioning System (GPS),
containing two dimensions representing the longitude and
latitude of the buildings, respectively. The K-Means clustering algorithm can divide the original data into k different
clusters based on the k initial centroids, where k is predeﬁned
number of clusters . The framework of K-Means clustering
algorithm is given as Algorithm 1.
In Algorithm 1, the InitializeCentroids() procedure randomly selects k nodes in the dataset as the initial centroids
E, then the PartitionClusters() operation divides the nodes
into k clusters C based on the initial centroids E. The nodes
that partitioned into the same cluster share the nearest mean.
The RecomputationCentroids() function computes new centroids Enew in the current clustering division C. The whole
algorithm is terminated when the iteration reaches the Imax
or the centroids E are no longer changed.

Fig. 3: Graphical representation of the system model. The
dotted circles represent different clusters, and the red/blue
nodes represent the start position of the UAV path in clusters.

B. Two-MA for path planning for the UAV and UGV
Two-MA aims to minimize the objective in Eq. (1) (minimize the distance of paths) for the UAV and UGV by simultaneously optimizing a population of solutions. The framework
of Two-MA for path planing is given as Algorithm 2, and
the corresponding operations are detailed next.
1) Initialization: In the initialization step, the Initialization() function randomly generates the initial population with
Spop individuals, in which each individual C represent a
possible planning path. Speciﬁcally, the position indexes
C are a set of positions’ indexes {Ci ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N }N ,
and the planning path passes through all buildings from

In the following, the K-means clustering algorithm and the
proposed memetic algorithm are described.
A. K-means clustering algorithm
Many clustering algorithm can be used to ﬁnd the clusters
of buildings in cites, including K-Means clustering [26],
Mean-Shift clustering [27], Density-Based Spatial Clustering
[28] and Hierarchical clustering [29]. Here the K-Means
clustering algorithm is adopted due to its low computational
complexity and good clustering effect. The urban buildings
978-1-7281-6479-3/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

27

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

