2024 IEEE 7th International Conference and Workshop Óbuda on Electrical and Power Engineering (CANDO-EPE) | 979-8-3315-3111-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CANDO-EPE65072.2024.10772992

CANDO-EPE 2024 • IEEE 7th International Conference and Workshop in Óbuda on Electrical and Power Engineering • October 17–18, 2024 • Budapest, Hungary

Conceptual Design of a UAV-UGV Autonomous
Collaborative Robot System
György Molnár
Trefort Ágoston Center for Engineering
Pedagogy
Óbuda University
Budapest, Hungary
ORCID: 0000-0001-5238-5078
molnar.gyorgy@kvk.uni-obuda.hu

Róbert Szabolcsi
Institute of Electronic and
Communication Systems
Óbuda University
Budapest, Hungary
ORCID: 0000-0002-2494-3746
szabolcsi.robert@kvk.uni-obuda.hu

Abstract—Collaborative robots (cobots) are in the focus of
attention since many years being applied widely in different
fields of the industry and national economies. In classical
meaning and content of the word, cobots are cooperating with
human operators in shared space working for the common
purpose of the effective production of goods or other products.
This article will extend the meaning of the word cobot to the
collaboration of two autonomous robot systems, such as ground
and air robots working together in close and shared space to
execute different safety and security missions.
Keywords—collaborative,
UAV/UAV, UGV

robots,

autonomous

systems,

I. INTRODUCTION
Recent collaborative robots (cobots) and robot systems are
designed to work in the friendly and well-known environment,
working together with human operators in joint missions.
The cobots are often substituting some missing human
resources in the manufacturing and national economies.
Moreover, use of cobots makes the production less expensive,
more reliable and predictable.
In many cobot applications the level of the complexity of
the tasks delivered to cobots is still not so high; however, there
are several privileges of the cobot applications like high level
of accessibility, high power in actions, safe functioning, fast
movements allowing high production rate in the production
process.
Collaborating robot systems are mostly pre-programmed
ones with given level of autonomy. In shared space with
humans they are able to execute their missions they designed
and prepared for. One of the major weakness of the industrial
cobots is the lack of autonomy in its very broad meaning.
The cobots can be used both for the private, non-state and
for the state purposes. The private, non-state use of cobots is
widely spread in the manufacturing and in national
economies.

Tibor Wührl
Institute of Electronic and
Communication Systems
Óbuda University
Budapest, Hungary
ORCID: 0000-0002-7522-3511
wuhrl.tibor@kvk.uni-obuda.hu

challenges at the battlefield can be handled by autonomous
cobots.
II. MOTIVATION AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
The main goal of this paper is to formulate the conceptual
design of the autonomous cobot system based upon two
subsystems like ground autonomous unmanned vehicle
(UGV) and the autonomous unmanned aerial vehicle system
(UAV) collaborating in joint ground and air missions.
The basic idea behind these co-operating system is a
synergistic and holistic approach in cobot system design
eliminating weaknesses and disadvantages of both of the
collaborating systems and strengthening advantages of both of
the co-operating systems.
In this article, in the framework of the international cobot
system design competition, the main purpose is to solve
different problems of the 2D and 3D path design and
navigation, re-charge of batteries and battery packs; searching,
finding and gripping of ground objects based on smart vision
systems.
The scenario of the cobot system design is described to be
solved in a cobot competition arena (CAA) designed for the
unique purpose of the competition.
III. LITERATURE REVIEW
Undoubtedly, the collaborative robots (cobots) had have
gained unavoidable role in different fields of the industrial
manufacturing.
In [1] a thorough literature review is shown to give an
overview of the recent state-of-the-art application of the
cobots, focusing on Industry 4.0 challenges of the past decade
when a human and a robot work together in the joint work
cells. The use of cobots was always a challenge due to their
human acceptance, or negligence.
The ‘human-robot’ collaboration acceptance model was
elaborated and introduced in [2] leaning on data gained from
different countries. This study has set up a new cobot
acceptance model able to express also the cross-cultural
differences.

The state applications of cobots can cover both military
and non-military applications. The non-military applications
of cobots are in disaster relief and in industrial catastrophe
missions, when the cobot mission replaces human activity in
the dirty, dull and dangerous missions when humans are under
threat of different dangerous events.

The more complex industrial scenario is described in [3],
when one has to investigate interactions between cobots, or
between human and robots.

The military applications of cobots today are at quiet low
level executing mostly logistical tasks. However, many

This article gives new content to the human-robot
interactions enhancing robot performances via better

979-8-3315-3111-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

000207

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

R. Szabolcsi et al. • Conceptual Design of a UAV-UGV Autonomous Collaborative Robot System

understanding of the human. Signals like facial animation,
hand gesture and arm motion.

Significant research reports and case studies [16] [17] have
also been published on cooperative robot collaboration.

The modern mass-production often require to run
collaborating assembly lines operating simultaneously to
multiple production rate. In the production different kinds of
asymmetries in the human-robot interactions might appear.

IV. THE UAV-UGV COLLABORATIVE ROBOT SYSTEM

In [4] for production line balancing an optimization
method has been introduced. In the study of the European
Parliament [5] risks and opportunities have been evaluated for
cobot market development.
In spite of the deep penetration of the cobots into national
economies, cobots can be used very effectively in shared
spaces.
Moreover, in some disaster management tasks to
strengthen efficacy of the first aid delivered to people snake
robots were used [6].
The article [7] focuses on industrial cobots evaluating
challenges of the manufacturers when to implement them.
Several factors have been involved when industrial
applicability of the cobots was evaluated.
According to [8], also in the modern production and
manufacturing systems different human factors like
ergonomics, mental workload, trust, acceptance and usability
are crucially important to take into consideration when to
design human operators’ workplace.
Recently the automotive industry is a segment of the
national economies, which is widely lean on cobots in solution
of welding tasks reducing or eliminating human interactions
in the production [9].

In this regard, the autonomous UAV-UGV system serves
the purpose to conduct an aerial recconnaissance using UAV
to find different objects made of different materials and
colours on the arena ground, to identify them, to pick them
up with grippers, and to carry them into designated area. The
more objects are found and placed ino designated area the
best results are gained.
V. THE AUTONOMOUS UAV (AUAV) SYSTEM
The autonomous multirotor AUAV is of any kind
equipped with electric propulsion system. The UAV MTOW
is 2 kg, including its payload.
The AUAVs are also prepared for the wireless recharge
of the batteries they use aboard. Before the first run the
AUAV is put into its landing zone (LZ) segregated inside the
arena manually.
After all flight missions, or after any mission aborted the
UAV shall return to its LZ and shut down its propulsion. If
the AUAV is leaving or reaching the segregated LZ it shall
be signalized with flashing navigation lights during 2.5
seconds with 2Hz of frequency.
Further, any signalization provided by the AUAV means
flashing navigation lights during 2.5 seconds with 2Hz of
frequency.
The AUAV shall own proper gripping systems able to
pick up targets from the floor. In case of necessity, the AUAV
is prepared for change of the gripping system it owns. Any
gripper change manoeuvre shall be conducted in the LZ area.
VI. THE AUTONOMOUS UGV (AUGV) SYSTEM

The control and monitoring of cobots is a crucial issue to
ensure safety and security both of the workcell and the human
operator. For this purpose, in [10] a new software system is
elaborated to control a cobot’s gripper position.

The autonomous AGV is a multipurpose ground rover
with omnidirectional drive system carrying battery pack for
wireless recharge of the batteries of the AUAVs.

The competitiveness of any cobot solution is a core
criterion for all applications. In [11] a case study is shown for
an automotive supplier priorities based upon skills distribution
between cobots and operators.

It also represents a catapult system able to throw target
devices from its magazine installed aboard into the arena in
three different directions previously selected by the teams for
the distance of 2 metres, as the minimum.

The article [12] addresses some useful results of the
interview made to evaluate human satisfaction with cobots in
manufacturing and production.

The magazine bay is normally closed with doors, and
opens at proper signalization prior to throw targets onto the
arena floor.

Cobots are also used very effectively in construction
industry. However, it is important to be familiar with the
trends in construction cobot developments and to have precise
and reliably forecast how the market of construction cobots
will develop. In this field, article [13] gives trends in safe
construction cobot development.

In the AUGV default home position, in the rover corner
(RC), it rests in the dock supplied with 230V/50Hz electricity
serving purpose of the wireless recharging of the battery pack
of the AGV.

Any substitution of human operator using cobots in
production process is motivated by different reasons. In article
[14] an example is given to calculate efficiency and cost
effectiveness of the cobot based production system leading to
an inevitable decision to substitute human.
In the case of cooperative robot systems, the movement
accuracy of individual robots must be maintained even in the
case of changing mass. [15] A change in load cannot cause
significant deviations in the system, because this hinders
cooperation and can sometimes be a source of accidents.

The maximum weight of the rover is 10 kg with
maximums of 40*40*40 centimetres of length, with and
height, respectively.
The top of the rover is a temporary landing zone of the
AUAVs serving simultaneously the wireless recharge of the
AUAV batteries used aboard.
The LZ mounted on the top of the AUGV might have
sizes differing from the rovers’ main sizes, but shall not
exceed of the size of 50*50 cm.
Signalization provided by the AUGV means both the
siren and flashing lights active during 2.5 seconds with 2Hz
of frequency.

000208

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CANDO-EPE 2024 • IEEE 7th International Conference and Workshop in Óbuda on Electrical and Power Engineering • October 17–18, 2024 • Budapest, Hungary

VII. THE COMPETITION ARENA (CA)
The indoor Competition Arena (CA) has natural and
artificial lighting, depending of the time.
The CA has sizing of 7*7 metres. The floor inside of the
CA is covered with commercial OSB plates.
The CA has 30 cm high walls made of OSB plates, too,
continued in 1 metres high plastic nets.
The top of the arena is also covered with light fishing
plastic nets to avoid any unwanted and uncontrolled runaway
flight of the UAV.

A. Task No1
The AUAV takes off for its first flight mission and starts
to hover over the LZ for minimum 10 seconds at 0.5 m of
altitude.
After, the AUAV leaves the LZ to the RA. The leave of
the LZ shall be signalized. The UAV reaches the RA, which
shall be signalized.
After, the AUAV returns to its LZ, lands and shuts down
its propulsion. The reach of the LZ is signalized by the UAV.

At 60 cm there is metallic strip of 2 cm width glued onto
the OSB plate. LZ: a squared area with 60*60 cm of
dimensions.
At 60 cm there is red plastic strip of 2 cm width glued
onto the standard OSB plate. Warehouses (W1, W2 and W3):
a squared area with 70*70 cm of dimensions.
At 70 cm there are black plastic stripes of 2 cm width
glued onto the OSB plate.
The Rendez-Vous Area (RA): is a squared area of the CA
sized with 1.5*1.5 metres, and designated on the floor with
blue coloured plastic strip of 2 cm width glued onto the OSB
plate.
Point ‘A’ is a square-shaped centre of the RA sized with
0.7*0.7 metres, and encircled with the Al-strip of 2 cm width.
Touch points (TP): B and C are touch points on the wall
of the CA located at 15 cm height as a square with 10*10 cm
sizes. Any reach of any TP shall be signalized like AUGV
used to do it.
Fig. 2. Representing the first task (Task No1) in CA

B. Task No2
The AGV conducts his first autonomous run to reach
firstly the A point of the RA with proper signalization.
At point A the AGV continues to manoeuvre to the next
TP, with touching the wall at point B with signalization.
After leaving point B the UGV starts to manoeuvre to
point C via point A.
On the way from point B to point C, at point A, the AGV
stops, and randomly fires out the target items carried by it.
The reach of point A is signalized.
Further, the AGV leaves point A and continues his run to
point C. The AGV touches point C, which is signalized.
After this, the AUGV returns back to the RC area. The
reach of the RC is signalized by the AGV.

Fig. 1. The Competition Arena from top view

VIII. THE SCENARIO AND COMPETITION TASKS
TO BE SOLVED

The cobot system designed for the competition has to
solve following tasks:
000209

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

