4906

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 6, MARCH 15, 2021

Cooperative Path Planning of UAVs & UGVs for a
Persistent Surveillance Task in Urban Environments
Yu Wu , Shaobo Wu, and Xinting Hu

Abstract—There have been many applications of drones in
urban environments, such as delivery, rescue, and surveillance.
In a persistent surveillance task, the drones sometimes cannot
complete it independently when some regions are required to be
covered on the ground. For this purpose, unmanned aerial vehicles and unmanned ground vehicles (UAVs & UGVs) system is
introduced to perform such a task in this article, and the goal
is to generate the circular paths for the drones and the UGVs,
respectively, to minimize their travel time of realizing a complete coverage. First, the cooperative path planning problem of
UAVs & UGVs is formulated into a large-scale 0-1 optimization
problem, in which the on–off states of the discrete points are to
be optimized. Second, a hybrid algorithm integrating the estimation of distribution algorithm (EDA) and the genetic algorithm
(GA) algorithm is proposed to solve the problem. The advantages
of EDA and GA in the global and local search are fully taken
considering the demands in different phases of the iterative process. A simple sweep-based approach is employed to determine
the optimal sequence of passing the open points. Then, an online
local adjustment strategy is also applied to address the changes of
the requirements on covering the ground area. Simulation results
demonstrate that the UAVs & UGVs system can enhance the efficiency of the task. The hybrid EDA-GA algorithm can greatly
improve the performance of EDA and GA in terms of the quality
and the stability of solutions. The online adjustment strategy is
effective to maintain a complete coverage while minimizing the
impact on the circular paths.
Index Terms—Drones, cooperative path planning, hybrid EDAGA algorithm, persistent surveillance, UGV, urban environments.

I. I NTRODUCTION
MALL unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, usually called
drones) have received a lot of attention in recent years and
have been applied in people’s daily life and public services.
On the one hand, the advantages of easy operation and low

S

Manuscript received June 27, 2020; revised August 21, 2020 and September
23, 2020; accepted October 7, 2020. Date of publication October 13, 2020;
date of current version March 5, 2021. This work was supported in part by
the Chongqing Research Program of Basic Research and Frontier Technology
under Grant cstc2020jcyj-msxmX0602; in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities under Project 2020 CDJ-LHZZ-066; and
in part by the China Scholarship Council under Project 201906055030.
(Corresponding author: Yu Wu.)
Yu Wu is with the College of Aerospace Engineering, Chongqing
University, Chongqing 400044, China, and also with the School of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
639798 (e-mail: cquwuyu@cqu.edu.cn).
Shaobo Wu is with the Automation School, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail:
wushaobo@bupt.edu.cn).
Xinting Hu is with the School of Air Traffic Management,
Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin 300300, China (e-mail:
2018031027@cauc.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2020.3030240

price attract more people to use drones for work and entertainment. On the other hand, the policy of opening the low-altitude
airspace encourages more applications of drones in urban environments [1]. Among the various applications, delivery, rescue,
target tracking, and surveillance are the most popular ones,
and the drone is required to complete the task by flying along
the specified path [2]. Therefore, the path planning problem
becomes the key issue to realize the autonomous flight of the
drone [3]. The path planning problems in the above tasks can
be classified into two groups according to their characteristics.
In the first group, the drone is required to reach the specified target, such as in the delivery [4] or the target tracking
task [5]. An optimal path from the start point to the destination
is needed. The second type of tasks is less common, in which
a complete coverage of a specified area is expected, and the
goal is usually to minimize the flying distance, flying time,
or fuel consumptions of drone [6], [7]. Aerial photography,
data collection, surveillance, and patrol belong to this group
of tasks.
In the existing studies, the surveillance task is usually performed by a single or multiple UAVs, and the unmanned
ground vehicle (UGV) is rarely involved in such a task. In
those studies, the shortest path of finishing a complete coverage of the specific area is usually focused on, but the
corresponding circular path is often ignored [8]. Even if the
circular path is considered in some studies, there is no or only
a few obstacles distributed in the area [9], which is quite
different from the situation in urban environments. Besides,
the vision field and the shooting resolution of the drone are
affected by its flight height, and the blocking of buildings
should be considered when calculating the actual coverage
area. As for the ground area to be covered, there are different
requirements on the shooting resolution for subareas, and some
subareas are even prohibited to be visited designedly [10].
However, the ground area is sometimes required to be covered with high accuracy or is hard to be covered (due to
the blocking of buildings), such as in the task of precise
observation or photographing on the ground objects. In those
tasks, the shooting resolution of camera on UAVs can hardly
meet the requirements, and the introduction of UGVs is a
good way to solve the problem. Furthermore, UGVs can
cooperate with UAVs to share the work, thus improving the
efficiency of performing the task. In this article, the cooperative path planning problem of the unmanned aerial vehicles
and unmanned ground vehicles (UAVs & UGVs) system in
a persistent surveillance task is focused on, and the goal is
to find two circular paths for UAVs and UGVs, respectively,

c 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2327-4662 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WU et al.: COOPERATIVE PATH PLANNING OF UAVs & UGVs FOR PERSISTENT SURVEILLANCE TASK IN URBAN ENVIRONMENTS

which can minimize their travel time of realizing a complete
coverage of the ground area.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized as
follows.
1) A UAVs & UGVs system is introduced to complete the
persistent surveillance task in urban environments. In
the established cooperative path planning model, various factors affecting the vision field and the shooting
resolution of drone are considered to reflect the real
requirements on the task. The problem is finally formulated into a large-scale 0-1 optimization problem,
including the outer and inner loops.
2) A hybrid algorithm integrating the estimation of distribution algorithm (EDA) and genetic algorithm (GA)
(named as the EDA-GA-based algorithm for convenience) is developed to solve the cooperative path
planning problem. In the outer loop, the on–off states of
the discrete points for the travels of drones and UGVs
are optimized by the hybrid EDA-GA algorithm. In the
inner loop, the sequences of passing those open points
are determined by a simple sweep-based approach to
generate the circular paths for the drones and the UGVs,
respectively, which can realize a complete coverage.
3) An online adjustment strategy on the circular paths is
designed considering the changes of demands on the
coverage area. A local modification is imposed on the
points of the circular path, which are influenced by
the increase or decrease of the inaccessible subareas. The
path points are added or deleted to maintain a complete coverage while having the minimal impact on the
existing circular paths.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
There have been many studies concentrating on the path
planning problems of drones for different civil applications,
such as the sowing, fertilization, and pollination in agriculture [11], the inspection around the high building [12], and
the rescue in the fire fighting [13]. However, as the short flight
endurance and the relatively low shooting resolution of drone
may fail to satisfy the demand in many tasks, it is not always
an effective way to deploy a team of drones to complete the
complicated tasks. Therefore, UGVs are introduced to cooperate with UAVs, such as in exploration and mapping task [14],
target localization [15], and environmental protection [16].
The UAVs & UGVs system is a typical kind of multiagent
system with heterogeneous vehicles, and similar systems are
composed by unmanned surface vehicles (USVs), unmanned
underwater vehicles (UUVs), and unmanned aerial-aquatic
vehicles (UAAVs), such as UAVs & USVs system [17], UAVs
& UUVs system [18], UAV & USV & UUV system [19],
and UAAV & UUV system [20]. In those systems, the heterogeneous vehicles can take their respective advantages and
compensate for each other. In a UAVs & UGVs system, UGV
can locate or detect the objects on the ground with higher
accuracy and make up the weakness of UAVs. Besides, UGVs
have a larger payload capability and a powerful computational
ability, and they can also charge for the UAVs. As for the

4907

UAVs, they can fly with high velocity and have a wide field
of vision, which is beneficial to guide the UGVs to avoid
obstacles [21]. In [22] and [23], a UAV equipped with a camera serves as the eye in the airspace and collects the ground
images. Then, after some processing, such as denoising and
correction, the ground map can be constructed to assist the
UGV in planning its path to the destination. A hybrid path
planning algorithm is proposed in [23]. GA works as the
outer loop to conduct the global path planning, and the rolling
optimization is applied in the inner loop to optimize the results
obtained from GA locally. Considering the different dynamics
characteristics of UAV and UGV, an improved artificial physics
approach is developed in [24] to coordinate UAVs and UGVs
to reach the same target. In the proposed approach, random
forces are introduced to make the UAVs and UGVs avoid the
local optimum and head for the target. The UAVs & UGVs
system also can be applied in a wilderness search and rescue
task [25]. The UAVs and UGVs carry out an aerial search
and a ground search, respectively, and the targets detected by
UAVs must be identified by a UGV again to ensure the accuracy. Isoprobability curves are used to search the target by
both UAVs and UGVs, and the new approach allows UAVs
to cover all possible target motions while also avoiding the
search redundancies considering the paths of UGVs.
In other cases, UGVs serve as moving platforms, and they
can both charge for the UAVs and carry the UAVs to voyage
longer distance [26]. Under this work mode, there are usually multiple places to be visited in a task, and those places
cannot be reached directly by the UGVs. First, UAVs are carried by the UGVs to arrival at some areas near the places
and then fly to the destination to finish the “last mile” of
the visit task [27]. According to the above descriptions, the
process can be formulated into a traveling salesman problem
(TSP), and many variations of the basic TSP are studied in the
existing literatures. A package delivery task is completed by
a UAV & UGV system in [28], and the packages must reach
the customers located at different places. The path of UGV
is restricted to the road network, and a two-stage strategy is
proposed to optimize both the paths of UAV and UGV. An
improved ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm is used to
obtain the optimal path of UGV that can make the UAV visit
more targets, and the GA algorithm is then applied to optimize
the path of UAV. Similarly, a UAV & UGV system is introduced to explore a planetary surface, and the goal is to visit a
number of target points while minimizing the travel distance
in [29]. In this task, UGV is regarded as a moving charging
station for the UAV, and the UAV is responsible for reaching
the target points. A cooperative exploration routing algorithm
is proposed to solve the problem. The charging stops where
the UGV can carry the UAV is optimized first, and the path of
UAV is calculated by solving the TSP. UGVs also can serve
as mobile charging stations in a persistent surveillance task of
a partitioned environment, and the paths of UAVs and UGVs
and the charging schedule of UAVs need to be optimized to
minimize the time interval between two consecutive visits to
regions [30]. Several UAVs & UGV teams are uniformly distributed over a cyclic path to execute the surveillance task of
a partitioned region, and the UAVs are being recharged by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4908

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 6, MARCH 15, 2021

(a)
Fig. 2.

Fig. 1. Scenario of performing the persistent surveillance task by the UAVs
& UGVs system.

UGV while they are transported from the current partition to
the next one. With this strategy, the large-scale optimization
problem is simplified into optimizing a supercycle of partitions for a single team composed by several UAVs and one
UGV.
In most cases, a team of UAVs is qualified for the persistent surveillance task in urban environments [31]. However,
when there are special requirements of the shooting resolution
on the ground area, the UAVs may not be able to fulfill the
task, and the introduction of UGVs can address this problem
and improve the efficiency of performing the task at the same
time. To the best of our knowledge, there are few publications
reporting the studies on cooperative path planning of persistent
surveillance task performed by the UAVs & UGVs system.
III. C OOPERATIVE PATH P LANNING M ODEL FOR THE
UAV S & UGV S S YSTEM IN THE P ERSISTENT
S URVEILLANCE TASK
To facilitate the operation of air traffic management for
drones, the low-altitude airspace in urban environments is
divided into a number of cubes with the same size, like the
operation of traffic management in civil aviation [32]. The
vertexes of the cubes are the possible path points which the
drone can fly across. Accordingly, the ground area is modeled
as a structure composed by many 2-D grids, which are the
projections of corresponding cubes on the horizontal plane.
The UGV can only pass the vertexes of the 2-D grids on the
ground. Under the proposed operation framework, the contents of establishing the cooperative path planning model are
depicted.
A. Description of the Persistent Surveillance Task and the
Travel Rules of Vehicles
In urban environments, there are many buildings distributed
in the low-altitude airspace, and the space occupied by the
buildings is denoted by the cubes. Drones must avoid those
buildings when they are flying, and the UGVs also need to
keep certain distance away from the buildings. Besides, there
are some obstacles on the ground, and the UGVs must avoid
them. To perform the persistent surveillance task of the whole
ground area, two circular paths must be obtained for the travel
of drones and UGVs, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.

(b)

Travel rules for the (a) drone and (b) UGV.

In Fig. 1, the coordinate system OXYZ is established to
describe the locations of grids, buildings, drones, and UGVs.
The cubes denote the buildings with different heights, and
there are four special types of 2-D grids.
1) Inaccessible grids that are forbidden to be covered by
the drone or the UGV.
2) Grids must be covered with special requirements on the
shooting resolution, which means the drone must reduce
its flight height to achieve a valid coverage.
3) Grids must be covered on the ground, and they only can
be covered by the UGVs.
4) Grids which are occupied by obstacles, and the UGV
must bypass them.
All the 2-D grids must be covered to realize a complete
coverage except for the inaccessible grids and the grids occupied by the buildings and obstacles. There are several drones
and UGVs located at the circular paths in the air and on the
ground, respectively, with the same interval, which can balance
the workload of each vehicle and ensure the normal operation
of the persistent surveillance task.
The travel rules for the drone and the UGV are defined as
follows. The drone located at one vertex can choose the vertex
of a connected edge, a face diagonal, or a body diagonal in one
neighboring cube as the next path point, and it is assumed to
fly along the straight line between two neighboring path points.
As for the UGV, it can select the vertex of a connected edge
or a face diagonal in one neighboring 2-D grid as the next
path point. The above travel rules are shown in Fig. 2.
In Fig. 2, l is the length of an edge both for a cube and a
2-D grid. According to the above descriptions, the equations
expressing the motion of the drone and the UGV are presented,
respectively, in
⎧ i
i
i
i
x (n + 1) = xD
(n) + dDx
(n), xD
(n)  {0, l, 2l, . . . , Xmax }
⎪
⎪
⎪ yD
i
i
i
i
⎪
+
1)
=
y
+
d
y
 {0, l, 2l, . . . , Ymax }
(n
(n)
(n),
(n)
⎪
D
D
Dy
D
⎨ i
i
i
i
{l, 2l, . . . , Zmax }
zD (n
+
1)
=
z
+
d
z

(n)
(n),
(n)
D
Dz
D
 i
i
i
⎪
d
d
d

{−l,
0,
l}
⎪
(n),
(n),
(n)
⎪
Dz
 
⎪ s.t.  Dx
 Dy

⎪
⎩
di (n) + di (n) + di (n) = 0
Dx
Dy
Dz
(1)
⎧ j
j
j
j
⎪
⎪ xG (m + 1) = xG (m) + dGx (m), xG (m)  {0, l, 2l, . . . , Xmax }
⎪
⎪
⎨ yj (m + 1) = yj (m) + dj (m), yj (m)  {0, l, 2l, . . . , Ymax }
G
G
Gy
G
j
j
d

{−l,
0,
l}
d
(m),
(m)
⎪
⎪

 Gx
 Gy

⎪
⎪
⎩ s.t. dj (m) + dj (m) = 0
Gx
Gy

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(2)

