2022 IEEE International Conference on Unmanned Systems (ICUS) | 978-1-6654-8456-5/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICUS55513.2022.9987158

Mingjia Zhang
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Hefei, China
University of Science and Technology
of China
Hefei, China
Nanjing Polytechnic Institute
Nanjing, China
hijia@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Huawei Liang*
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Hefei, China
Anhui Engineering Laboratory for
Intelligent Driving Technology and
Application
Hefei, China
Innovation Research Institute of
Robotics and Intelligent
Manufacturing Chinese Academy of
Sciences
Hefei, China
hwliang@iim.ac.cn

Abstract Heterogeneous UGV-UAV system can efficiently
complete large-scale tasks such as exploration and rescue by
collaborative operation. This paper proposes a route planner
based on a dynamic aggregation strategy to select the timeoptimal routes for function-constrained UGV and fuelconstrained UAV to reach all the mission points. To reduce the
time consumption of waiting at the take-off point, UGV and
UAV are inclined to rendezvous at the next meeting point by nowait operations. We present a two-step routing strategy to
address this cooperative problem. First, the Voronoi diagram
and greedy set cover method are used to determine meeting
points and task areas. Then, solving a traveling salesman
problem to find a UGV path by A-star and Lin-Kernighan
heuristic. After that, an adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic is proposed to address vehicle routing problem with
recharge for UAV among multiple task areas. The simulation
and real experiment results demonstrate that our approach can
effectively generate a time-optimal path for UGV-UAV
Cooperative exploration.
Keywords UGV-UAV, Fuel-constrained, Route planning,
Adaptive large neighborhood search, Cooperative exploration

I.
INTRODUCTION
In the past decade, the heterogeneous UGV-UAV system
has had a rapid development and cooperative aerial-ground
vehicle has been widely adopted in many applications
including reconnaissance, surveillance, and exploration [1].
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have emerged as a
promising exploration tool because of their advantages of low
weight, small size, and good flexibility. However, due to their
limited battery capacity, they can only be used in relatively
small areas.
By coordinating with the UAV, the UGV can provide
recharging support for large-scale exploration [2]. Meanwhile,
UGV can detect drivable areas to realize autonomous driving
on rough roads based on the aerial image acquired from the
UAV. On the basis of the new cooperative mode, we research
the combinatorial optimization of UAV and UGV to further
*Corresponding author
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under Grant 2020AAA0108103 in part by the Institute
of Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing Innovation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences under Grant C2021002, and in part by Scientific Research
Foundation of Nanjing Polytechnic Institute under Grant NJPI-2021-11.

PengFei Zhou
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Hefei, China
Anhui Engineering Laboratory for
Intelligent Driving Technology and
Application
Hefei, China
Innovation Research Institute of
Robotics and Intelligent
Manufacturing Chinese Academy of
Sciences
Hefei, China
pfzhou@hfcas.ac.cn

Fig. 1. An illustration of route planning for UGV-UAV
exploration (red circle is the target point and blue star is the start
point).

improve the efficiency of exploration. Fig. 1 shows an
example scenario where there are lots of wide distributed
target points that need to be arrived by fuel-limited UAV and
UGV driving in the road network as a mobile recharging
station.
This paper proposes suitable heuristics and a two-step
optimization method to solve this non-deterministic
polynomial-time problem in optimal time. The strategy starts
by computing an iterative Voronoi diagram as an interpolation
method in order to search the most suitable set of recharging
stations for UAV relates to the road network. According to the
result of partitioning, task points are allocated to the
corresponding meeting point. Then, we determine the ideal
number of meeting points using the greedy set cover method
to cover every target point. Through domain decomposition,
it is possible to reduce computing scale by turning a largescale problem into several smaller discrete subproblems. On
the one hand, an optimization method based on the A*
algorithm reduces the distance traveled between meeting
points by the UGV. On the other hand, the components of the
adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) heuristic are
tailored to solve UAV path planning preferred to generate
routes across task areas. According to our knowledge, no
previous work has been done on this sort of dynamic
aggregation strategy.

 ‹ ,(((
1047

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
gives a brief overview of the state-of-the-art development.
Section III presents a mathematical formulation of the
cooperative route planning problem and introduces the
improved algorithm. Some experiments are conducted in real
traffic situations and the results are presented in Section IV.
Finally, we conclude this paper and discuss future research
directions in Section V.
II.

RELATED WORKS

Extensive research about cooperative route planning of
fuel-constrained UGV-UAV has been carried out leading to a
great many problem solutions. Chen J [3] classifies the
Collaborative Methods of UGV-UAV systematically, applies
the clustering method to target allocation, and discusses the
multi-point dynamic aggregation problem. Tan C S [4]
compares various route planning algorithms in terms of
accuracy, time performance, and applicable environment.
Murray and Chu [5] put forward the FSTSP, which
involves a single vehicle and a drone accomplish parcel
delivery task together. A complementary problem to the
FSTSP is PDSTSP which most delivery destination are
located near the transportation route and stopping place. As a
result, the drone is within flight range of near-neighboring
customers, whereas the vehicle may independently service
faraway consumers. Both problems were addressed with
heuristics and mixed integer linear programming (MILP) and
prove the effectiveness of the heuristic method. TSP-D
formulation composed of trucks and drones share the same
road network is proposed by Agatz et al. [6]. Additionally,
drones can also be launched and returned to the same location,
UAVs play a more effective role than before. Bouman et al.
[7] extended the work by analyzing the problem from two
perspectives. In order to solve the original TSP, the dynamic
programming approach is used, which involves the shortest
path algorithm applied to the TSP truck route and drone nodes.
Moreover, they also presented an A* algorithm that is better
in all cases for larger instances to solve the time performance
of dynamic programming. Even so, the above methods only
permit UAVs to visit one potential target point while flying,
which negatively impacts the performance of the UAV in
terms of time.
Maini and Sujit [8] define the Fuel Constrained UAV
Refueling Problem with Mobile Refueling Station (FCURPMRS). This work is similar to ours in that the UAV must visit
each target site, but the mobile refueling station has no routing.
On this basis, Ropero F [9] define Energy Constrained UAV
and Charging Station UGV Routing Problem (ECU-CSURP).
Cooperative routing for UGV-UAV considering fuelconstrain using cooperaTive ExploRation Routing Algorithm
(TERRA) is proposed, but it just supports UAV-UGV start
and end at the same point. When the scope of the task area is
determined, UGV should stay at the meeting location until
relevant UAV has visited all of the task points. Although this
method can get the optimal total distance, it is not optimal in
terms of the actual running time of the system. For the above
reasons, we consider an extension of FCURP-MRS and
TERRA to support dynamic aggregation which means UAV
should consider adjacent areas and arrive at the next meeting
point preferentially.
A branch and bound algorithm [10] and decompositionbased iterative heuristic [11] are proposed for improving
solutions. propose a. There have been studies that have

reduced the number of optimization variables and constraints,
enabling the exact methods to be computed more quickly. In
addition to exact algorithms, heuristics algorithms such as
Genetic algorithm [12] and Tabu search [13] show better
performance as to solution quality, solving rapidity, and
algorithm robustness for larger instances. The adaptive large
neighborhood search (ALNS) heuristic has grown to be a
well-known framework for applying heuristic solution
techniques [14]. Ghilas V [15] proposed neighborhoodsearch-based heuristics to solve the Pickup and Delivery
Problem with Time constraints and predetermine route.
Results show that the ALNS is highly effective in finding
good-quality solutions considering complex constraints. In
this paper, we use a hybrid tabu search heuristic-based
improved ALNS algorithm to find a feasible solution and
improve the solution quality.
III.

METHODS

Fig. 2. An dynamic aggregation solution for ECU-CSURP

A. Problem Statement
The objective is to generate a cooperative routing for the
heterogeneous UGV-UAV system to visit all targets while
trying to minimize processing time. As soon as insufficient
power is available to continue performing the next task for the
UAV, it returns to the vehicle for battery replacement. As
shown in Fig. 2, when several task nodes are more densely
distributed and not time-consuming, the UAV may inspect
several task nodes at a time before returning to the vehicle to
replace the battery. In the process of returning, the UAV and
the vehicle may rendezvous at the original meeting point, i.e.,
the vehicle is still parked at the original meeting point waiting
after the UAV is deployed, such as point 3 and point 4 in Fig.
2; or the vehicle may also leave the original meeting point
after the UAV is deployed, and the UAV and the vehicle
rendezvous at another different meeting point, such as point 1
and point 2 in Fig. 2.
The basic assumptions are:
UGV does not have any energy constraints.
UGV and UAV move at fixed speeds, and UGV travels
at a significantly slower speed than UAV.
Not considering time spent at the meeting point for
recharging and at the target point.
The sets and variables used to model the UAV multiple
depot capacity vehicle routing problem are listed in Table I.

1048

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I.
Sets and
Variables

SETS AND VARIABLES USED IN THE FORMULATION
Description

1) The Voronoi diagram and the greedy set cover
algorithm are used to determine the necessary number of
meeting points to cover all task points in the road network.
2) The A* and LKH algorithm is employed to plan the
distance-optimal path for UGV along the road network. The
hybrid ALNS algorithm is used to plan the time-optimal path
for UAV.

Elements

The set of meeting points

The set of edges for UGV
and UAV

Begin

Load and display task point location

Divide task area and generate candidate
assembly points by Voronoi diagram

We express the FCURP-MRS with the following integer
programming model:

Is minimum
cover set

Optimization of assembly points

UGV optimal path planning

(1)

UAV optimal path planning

(2)
Is Timeoptimal

(3)

Output UGV-UAV cooperative route

(4)

End

(5)

Fig. 3. The whole system control scheme.

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Equation (1) is the objective function, which minimizes
the total time cost for the exploration task including three parts.
The first part involves the departure of the UAV from the
meeting point and arriving at the task location. The second
part is UAV travel among the task points. The Third part is the
UAV returning to the meeting point for recharge. In this paper,
the UGV path is preprocessed to generate a fixed value. The
total time of cooperative exploration is the UGV time cost
adding the UAV time cost.
Equation (2) implies the constraint that every task point
should visit only once by the UAV. Equation (3) indicates the
Equation (4) implies the constraint that UAV should land at
UGV after completing the task. Equation (5) implies the
constraint that the UAV can only start from a meeting point.
Equation (6) represents the fuel constraints. Equation (8)
shows that the role of
is to judge UAV returns to the
original meeting point or travels simultaneously with UGV to
the next meeting point. If the UAV path is support dynamic
aggregation, then the time cost for this path no longer counted
in the total cost.
B. Solution Algorithm
In consideration of the solution space scale, we use a twoto solve
step
FCURP-MRS. Fig. 3
the whole system control
scheme. Specifically, the algorithm consists of the following
steps:

Dynamic aggregation
strategy

C. First Step
The first step is comparable to the work in FCURP-MRS,
placing intermediate UGV charging stops, so that, allows the
UAV to reach its destination by replenishing its energy.
However, our computational approach is founded on the boost
polygon library to calculate the Voronoi diagram. The program
generates an iterative Voronoi diagram that covers the desired
locations in the road network. Map information is crucial to
finding the correct meeting point. The topological struct of
the road network is defined by nearest road curve and point.
The method supports both points and edges as site types. The
objective is to calculate a set of vertices located on the road
network, whose areas cover all of the target spots. We tailored
the implementation of a greedy set cover algorithm to search for
a minimal set of vertices whose regions provide complete
coverage of the collection of target points.
Algorithm 1 shows the main process. The inputs consist of
the list of target sites and the UAV maximum flight time.
Algorithm1 Voronoi diagram and greedy set cover
1
Input:
2
Output:
3
//
: set of target points not covered
4
// : set of target points covered
5
// : set of nearest road node in flying range
6
// : set of alternative meeting points
do
7
While
8
Compute Voronoi edges
as
9
Use map information to find
10
Connect the nearest task point as
11
Update
12 end while
13 Get the
belong to
14 Order the set by weights using greedy strategy

1049

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

