IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 6, NO. 1, MARCH 2022

69

Energy-Efficient Ground Traversability Mapping
Based on UAV-UGV Collaborative System
Jianqiang Li , Member, IEEE, Yanyan Cheng, Jin Zhou , Jie Chen , Zun Liu, Shuqing Hu,
and Victor C. M. Leung , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—With the development of science and technology,
robots have been widely used in smart cities. The traversability
mapping of environment perception is the prerequisite for robots
to perform tasks. To save the energy consumption of traversability mapping for unmanned ground vehicle (UGV), we fusion a
wide range of aerial images and a small amount of ground images
to provide vision for UGV. Current map fusion methods are usually constrained by homogeneous model of robotic systems and
lack of diverse sensors. As a result, they cannot work well in
heterogeneous collaborative robotic systems that consist of aerial
and ground robots. In this paper, we use heterogeneous robot
systems, including UGV and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to
build an occupancy grid map that can be used for navigation. To
fuse sensor data of different types, we propose a Collaborative
Map Fusion algorithm based on Multi-task Gaussian Process
Classification (MTGPC) using heterogeneous robotic systems.
Besides, probabilistic model is exploited in traversability mapping, so the active perception can be used to build the map
efficiently. Our system is tested in real scenes and can achieve
an accuracy of more than 70%. The map fusion using active
perception is better than map fusion using random strategy in
terms of speed and accuracy. To our knowledge, this is the first
work that can build the occupancy grid map using sparse data
points sampled from aerial images and ground lidar map.
Index Terms—Map fusion, multi-task Gaussian process classification, heterogeneous robotic system.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N MAP-BASED navigation, UGV can quickly determine
the current location and navigate to the target location.
The demand for autonomous mobile robots such as UGVs
and UAVs has greatly increased in recent years, however,
it has been proved to be a challenging work for UGVs to

I

Manuscript received March 14, 2021; revised July 21, 2021; accepted
August 14, 2021. Date of publication August 24, 2021; date of current version February 16, 2022. This work was supported in part by
the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant U1713212,
Grant 62072315, Grant 61836005, Grant 61806130, Grant 62073225,
and Grant 62006157; in part by the National Key R&D Program of
China under Grant 2020YFA0908700; in part by the Natural Science
Foundation of Guangdong Province-Outstanding Youth Program under
Grant 2019B151502018; and in part by Public Technology Platform of
Shenzhen City under Grant GGFW2018021118145859. (Corresponding
authors: Jie Chen; Victor C. M. Leung.)
Jianqiang Li, Yanyan Cheng, Jin Zhou, Jie Chen, Zun Liu, and Shuqing Hu
are with the College of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China (e-mail: chenjie@szu.edu.cn).
Victor C. M. Leung is with the College of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China, and also with
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada (e-mail: vleung@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGCN.2021.3107291

navigate in unknown areas due to the uncertainty of the
environment [1]. Recently, these robots are deployed to perform various dangerous or repetitive tasks. The robots need
information about their surrounding environment to complete
the assigned task, which is usually encoded as a traversability
map [2]. There are two approaches for the robot to navigate. The first approach assumes that the robot knows nothing
about the environment such as the Simultaneous Localization
And Mapping (SLAM) [3]–[5] which allows robots to gradually build a complete traversability map while moving in an
unknown environment. Generally, exploring an unknown environment will encounter many problems. For example, UGVs
could fall into dead ends and need to avoid obstacles, but cameras or lidar detectors cannot detect low-lying lands or stairs
in time due to the blind areas. The second approach assumes
that the robot performs tasks in a given traversability map [6],
this map-based navigation is natural for humans. More specifically, when visiting unknown cities, we only need an existing
navigation traversability map in a standard format.
There are many traversability mapping methods in the
field of robotics research, and most existing path planning
approaches are based on occupancy grid maps which are good
choices for ground navigation [7], [8]. Occupancy grids, as
they were introduced by Moravec and Elfes(1985), are based
upon a regular tessellation of the space into a number of
rectangular cells. They store in each cell c of this grid the
probability p(c) that the corresponding area in the environment is occupied by an obstacle. The occupancy grid maps
include deterministic and probabilistic. The former is to indicate whether there are obstacles at each location, the latter is
to indicate the probability of an obstacle at each location and
can provide users with better judgment based on probabilistic
value. Some studies use node information to construct a topological map for navigation [9]. The topology map contains
two basic elements: 1) the convex free space clusters (vertices) and 2) the topological edges connecting adjacent vertices
which indicates that a robot can pass between the corresponding vertices. But it is not good at expressing complex structural
areas and the shape of obstacles. The 3D texture mapping in
Visual Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (VSLAM) is
used for UAV applications [10]. It provides a powerful tool for
abundant environmental information for navigation and visualization. The precise 3D model allows researchers to interact
with the data acquired during the mission and understand the
characteristics of the spatial distribution and environmental
structure to guide the flight of the UAV. But it cannot be

c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2473-2400 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

70

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 6, NO. 1, MARCH 2022

used directly for navigation and requires further processing.
The data of these traversability maps is a deterministic value,
which will cause a problem. When the system does not have
enough data to predict the traversability map at a certain place,
its predicted value at this place will be extremely uncertain.
Therefore, the data is very inaccurate. However, users do not
know this situation when using the traversability map but have
very high trust in it, which will cause inestimable losses. In this
paper, we build a probabilistic traversability map for UGV navigation. They divide the two-dimensional environment space
into same-sized grids. Each grid represents a two-dimensional
space region in the real environment and the states of grids
are occupied or unoccupied.
The world we live in is full of change and unpredictability, so it is difficult to design an autonomous robot that can
effectively adapt to all situations. There are many robots of
various shapes, sizes and functions, such as UAVs, dual-arm
robots [11] and exoskeleton robots [12], [13]. Since different sensors have different advantages and limitations, each
robot can carry heterogeneous sensors such as laser scanners, cameras. Although three-dimensional (3-D) lidars have
a field of view of 360◦ , the quality of the maps they generate is not satisfactory due to the sparsity of their physical
properties. RGB-D cameras produce denser, more detailed 3-D
maps, but their fields of view are limited, and as the sensing
range increases, the observation error increases exponentially. Therefore, using homogeneous sensors in multi-robot
systems is far from enough in terms of mapping accuracy
and robustness [14]. However, employing heterogeneous sensors on multiple robots can make full use of their advantages
and provide a more accurate description of the environment.
Therefore, multiple robots equipped with different sensors are
designed to cooperate with each other to successfully complete
complex tasks [15] such as assisting people in environmental monitoring tasks [16], search and rescue tasks [17] and
medical care [18]. The air-ground robotic system has the
potential to outperform uni-modal robotic systems. We use
an air-ground cooperative robot system to combine and take
advantage of the aerial and ground robots to generate an occupancy grid map that can be used for navigation of UGVs. The
reasons we use an air-ground map fusion are two folds: 1) The
lidar maps of the UGVs are accurate, but the observable range
of lidar sensors are limited. The UGVs are prone to fall into
the low-lying land and dead corners, which leads to low efficiency of traversability mapping [3], [4]. 2) The image maps
of UAVs have a wide perspective and low mapping cost, but
the accuracy of traversability mapping is low and the two view
is easily effected by light or obstacles, such as branches [10].
The proposed method aims to combine the best of two worlds.
The motivation for this paper is that the research of exploiting a multi-robot map fusion framework using Multi-task
Gaussian Process(MTGP) has not been studied extensively. In
general, the map fusion problem is composed of the estimation
of relative transformations and the integration of partial map
information, which is usually tackled separately [19]. Existing
approaches usually employ point set registration algorithms
to achieve map matching [20], [21], where the hard one-toone correspondence relationship is assigned. Since the intrinsic

characteristics (i.e., density. range, field-of-view) of the map
vary from different sensors, accurate estimation of the relative transformation is a challenging problem. In this paper, we
use a probabilistic model called Multi-task Gaussian Process
(MTGP) to solve map fusion of heterogeneous robots (airground collaborative robots) and generate an occupied grid
map. Firstly, we use the idea of Gaussian process (GP) [22],
the predicted value is expressed as a probability value that
follows the Gaussian distribution (GD) so that people can
be on target when using the traversability map. Then, map
fusion using heterogeneous robot teams will dynamically solve
complex tasks by effectively combining their complementary
functions [23]. However, because the data comes from different perspectives and scopes, how to effectively coordinate
heterogeneous teams has been an ongoing challenge in multirobot research [24], [25]. Multi-task learning is usually used to
train prediction models by building correlations between data
of different tasks. The occupancy states from air and ground
are expressed in discrete binary values, respectively. Based on
the data of the UGV and UAV sensors corresponding to the
known area, the occupancy probability of the unknown area
is predicted. The system can fuse aerial and ground data and
can display the results in the form of probability.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We propose a Multi-task Gaussian Process Map Fusion
(MGPMF) system of heterogeneous robots to fuse aerial
and ground data and generate an traversability map. The
system can predict occupied probability of unknown
areas by establishing the relationship between the image
map and the lidar map corresponding to each coordinate
in the known areas.
2) We use the MGPMF system based on GP for data fusion
to get a probabilistic traversability map. So we can use
active perception to guide UGV and UAV to perform
path planning and map fusion in the traversability map
with high uncertainty, which improves the efficiency of
mapping task.
3) Our proposed system has been verified in a real scenario and can achieve an accuracy of more than 70%.
The efficiency and accuracy of using active perception
mapping are higher than random mapping.
II. R ELATED W ORK
An accurate traversability map is a prerequisite for the robot
to precisely navigate and can ensure that the vehicle can be
safely guided without a driver. Among the existing methods
of map fusion, some use homogenous data for map fusion,
that is, data fusion of multiple UGV sensors or UAV sensors
(i.e., multiple cameras) [19], [26]. A global occupancy map
is built in real time by incrementally fusing local overlapping
Hilbert maps [27]. It uses scans data from multiple UAVs without considering the aerial perspective. Reference [28] consider
evidence integration from potentially dependent observation
processes under varying spatio-temporal sampling resolutions
and noise levels. However, these methods cannot fuse heterogeneous data and take advantage of air-ground collaborative
robot systems. The Deep Gaussian Processes(DGP) has a two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: ENERGY-EFFICIENT GROUND TRAVERSABILITY MAPPING BASED ON UAV-UGV COLLABORATIVE SYSTEM

layer structure that the first layer is responsible for extracting shared and task specific features, while the second layer
transforms the features into task specific outputs [29]. It can
capture non-linear relationship between the tasks, but the time
consumption greatly increased. This paper provides an abstract
description of the environment through hand-drawn sketch so
that the robot can perform autonomous navigation and exploration when the complete environmental metric description is
not available in advance [30]. But it requires a lot of artificial
information which is costly. Similarly, a Bayesian framework
is proposed that fuses robot motion and visual features for
regular 3-D mapping [31]. Besides, a novel idea is proposed
for depth estimation from multi-view image-pose pairs [32].
The depth maps can accurately encode the surrounding environmental information, but they cannot be used directly for the
navigation of UGVs. The MGPMF system we proposed can
fuse air and ground information and generate an occupancy
grid map.
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) improves generalization by
leveraging the domain-specific information contained in the
training signals of related tasks [33]. While the Single-Task
GP models the covariance between the values of the same
task at different positions, the MTGP allows one to perform simultaneous learning of multiple tasks by modelling
the covariance between different tasks at their respective positions [34]. MTGPs perform significantly better than individual
GPs at the modeling problem as they effectively integrate
heterogeneous sources of information (concentrations of individual elements) to improve the individual predictions of each
of them [35]. MTL effectively increases the sample size that
we are using for training our model. Regarding air-ground
map fusion, the image information captured by the UGVs
is easily available. We use MTL for multi-task classification
by sharing information between related tasks. The earliest
is to use the k-nearest neighbor task clustering algorithm
to do multi-task classification [36]. Xue et al. derived the
distribution from the Dirichlet process and proposed a symmetric multitask learning (SMTL) and asymmetric multitask
learning (AMTL) formula to enable the model to learn the similarity between different tasks [37]. A generalized sequential
minimal optimization (SMO) algorithm is also used for multitask classification. Compared with the typical SVM + MTL
problem, the proposed SMO can achieve more than 100 times
speedup [38]. A deep relationship network is proposed to learn
the relationship between tasks [39]. Because the classification
category we expect is a probability value, we use the MTGP
model to do multi-task classification, which is conducive to
active perception in Section III-C.
In addition to air-ground map fusion, another of our
improvements is to use active perception to efficiently build
maps. A decentralized active sensing algorithm is devised to
address the problem of active sensing: How can autonomous
robotic vehicles actively cruise a road network to gather
and assimilate the most informative data for predicting a
spatiotemporally varying traffic phenomenon [40] The sensory system uses a new active phase unwrapping method to
effectively determine both 2-D and 3-D sensory information
of scenes consisting of multiple objects [41]. However, in

71

existing mapping, Gregorio and Stefano [42] extract elevation
maps from laser sensor data and use these maps for navigating an all-terrain vehicle. The elevation map consists of
a two-dimensional grid, which stores the height of the surface in the corresponding area in each cell of the discrete
grid. Triebel et al. [43] introduced multilevel surface maps
which is an extension of elevation maps. Compared to elevation maps, multi-level surface maps store in each cell of
a discrete grid a list of surfaces and allow mobile robots to
operate in environments with multiple levels. Furthermore,
Ryde and Hu [44] proposed the volumetric representation
with multi-resolution occupied voxel lists. There is an explicit
merge or rasterization step to generate a global occupancy
map based on the optimized pose [45]. However, as unoccupied areas and unknown areas are not represented, all of the
above approaches [42]–[45] cannot update the maps in a probabilistic form. The maps generated by the MGPMF system are
probabilistic traversability maps. If the probability of a point
is close to 0, the point will be considered unoccupied; if the
probability is close to 1, the point will be considered occupied; if the probability is near 0.5, it will be considered an
uncertain point.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The ground traversability mapping proposed can be defined
as (1):
MP = MGPMF (A1 , A2 , A3 , . . . , G)

(1)

where MP represents the fusion map of UAVs and UGV, Ai
represents the image data of the ith UAV and G represents
the lidar maps of the UGV, MGPMF is the system we propose. The MGPMF system is divided into three parts, image
matching, map fusion, and active perception. First, the relationship between the coordinate system of the lidar maps and
the image maps is constructed to obtain the initial training
data set. Then, the MTGP is used to fuse the heterogeneous
image maps and the lidar maps to generate probability occupied grid maps. Finally, based on the generated probabilistic
traversability maps, active perception is used to guide UGVs
and UAVs for path planning, which improves the efficiency of
map fusion. As shown in Fig. 1, the data collection and data
processing will be described in detail in Section IV-A.
A. Image Matching
In order to obtain training data, we match the lidar map
and the semantic map to obtain the labels for both of them
in the same position, as shown in Fig. 1. Image matching needs to consider the scale, translation, and rotation of
the two pictures. Regular image matching algorithms include
gray-based matching algorithms and feature-based matching
algorithms. Perform block matching based on known template images to find similar sub-images in another image.
The gray-based matching algorithm is also called the correlation matching algorithm, which uses a two-dimensional
spatial sliding template for matching such as Mean Absolute
Differences (MAD) [46]. The feature-based matching algorithm first extracts the features of the image, then generates

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

