2021 IEEE 23rd Int Conf on High Performance Computing & Communications; 7th Int Conf on Data Science & Systems; 19th
Int Conf on Smart City; 7th Int Conf on Dependability in Sensor, Cloud & Big Data Systems & Application

2021 IEEE 23rd Int Conf on High Performance Computing & Communications; 7th Int Conf on Data Science & Systems; 19th Int Conf on Smart City; 7th Int Conf on Dependability in Sensor, Cloud & Big Data Systems
& Application (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys) | 978-1-6654-9457-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/HPCC-DSS-SMARTCITY-DEPENDSYS53884.2021.00223

1

Game Theoretical Bandwidth Allocation in
UAV-UGV Collaborative Disaster Relief Networks
Bincheng Ying+ , Zhou Su++ , Qichao Xu+ , Xiandong Ma+
+School of Mechatronic Engineering and Automation, Shanghai University, China
++School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Corresponding Author: zhousu@ieee.org

Abstract—After a natural disaster, cellular communications
may be hard to meet the needs of disaster relief due to the
destruction of infrastructures, such as base stations and power
stations. In order to transmit rescue data in time, the disaster
relief network based on unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) is
advocated to transmit rescue-critical data to the relief center.
However, due to the driving-difﬁcult roads in the disaster area
and small communication coverage of UGVs, UGVs-assisted disaster relief network faces the challenge to quickly and accurately
collect wide-range disaster information. To tackle this problem,
in this paper, we ﬁrst take unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
to develop a UAV-UGV collaborative disaster relief network
architecture, where the UAVs with high mobility, wide view
and agility can efﬁciently help UGVs to perceive the disaster
information. Then, to realize the efﬁcient data delivery between
UAVs and UGVs with limited bandwidth resources, we devise
a game-based bandwidth allocation framework. In speciﬁc, the
multi-leaders multi-followers Stackelberg game is used to model
the interactions between UGVs and UAVs, where each UGV acts
as a leader to determines its bandwidth capacity and each UAV
acts as a follower to determines its access selection based on the
bandwidth capacity. Especially, the non-cooperative game model
is introduced to analyze the competitions among UGVs, and the
evolutionary game is utilized to study the strategy adjustments
of UAVs. Through the backward induction method, the optimal
access selection of each UAV and the optimal bandwidth capacity
of each UGV are obtained, which form the Stackelberg equilibrium. At last, extensive simulation results demonstrate that the
proposed scheme outperforms the conventional counterparts on
the utilities of both UAVs and UGVs.
Index Terms—Disaster relief network, UAV-UGV collaboration, bandwidth allocation, Stackelberg game, evolutionary game.

I. I NTRODUCTION
As it is known to all, natural disasters often cause a large
number of innocent human casualties and economic losses in
the world [1], [2]. Therefore, how to minimize the loss of
economy and lives after disaster has become a great challenge
for countries. The restoration of communication networks
plays a critical role in disaster relief [3]. If the communication
networks are failed, the working competence of rescue teams
would degrade rapidly. According to the previous work [4],
the communication network should be rebuilt in 72 hours as
soon as possible to establish effective and efﬁcient connections
between rescue workers and the remote command center.
However, because of the unpredictable natural disasters, the
original communication infrastructures may be damaged seriously, which cannot support the efﬁcient post-disaster rescue.

978-1-6654-9457-1/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/HPCC-DSS-SmartCity-DependSys53884.2021.00223

As such, how to rapidly deploy emergency communication
networks in such disaster areas has been of a great concern
problem. Nowadays, some schemes combined with device-todevice (D2D) communication and wireless sensors networks
(WSNs) [5] have been proposed to build disaster relief networks in disaster areas. However, the communication distance
between two wireless nodes is short and the communication
performance can be easily affected by geography. In addition,
wireless nodes in the affected areas are easily damaged by
secondary disasters.
In recent years, unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) equipped with a variety of sensors, large-scale batteries, and
communication modules can replace human beings to enter
disaster areas for carrying out dangerous missions with long
endurance. Therefore, UGVs equipped with communication
modules can be employed to establish disaster relief networks.
However, the roads in the disaster regions can be damaged
seriously which leads to that in UGVs can not enter deep into
the affected zones. Besides, due to the limitation of mobility
and communication coverage, UGVs are not able to serve a
large range of devices effectively.
Due to the high ﬂexibility, wide communication coverage,
and light-of-sight (LoS), unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
can transmit data to ground devices [6]. Through air-toground (A2G) and air-to-air (A2A) communications, UAVs
can be adopted to build air-ground networks with high quality.
Therefore, the application of UAVs is an effective solution
to assist UGVs-based networks in disaster areas. UAVs can
utilize the bandwidth shared by UGVs to serve the ground
communication equipment. However, there are still several
challenges for UAVs and UGVs to build an efﬁcient emergency
communication network. First, each UGV has no idea about
the capacity of bandwidth it should share with UAVs. Second,
UAVs usually select a UGV sharing a large bandwidth capacity
in order to maximize the transmission rate, which will result
in a UGV selected by too many UAVs at the same time. Furthermore, the bandwidth is limited under disaster situations.
Therefore, it is necessary to design an efﬁcient scheme to
allocate bandwidth in the disaster relief network.
In this paper, we propose a game theoretical bandwidth
allocation in UAV-UGV collaborative disaster relief network
to transmit rescuing data. Firstly, we jointly employ the UAVs
and UGVs to develop a UAV-UGV collaborative disaster
relief network architecture. Secondly, in order to solve the
problem of delivering data with limited bandwidth resources,

1498

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

we devise a game-based bandwidth allocation framework.
Thirdly, an iterative algorithm based on backward induction
is developed to obtain the Stackelberg equilibrium. Finally,
extensive simulation results prove that our scheme has better
performance than conventional counterparts on the utilities of
both UAVs and UGVs. In a nutshell, the main contributions
of this work are as follows:
• Disaster Relief Network Architecture: We novelly develop a UAV-UGV cooperative disaster relief network
architecture based on UAVs and UGVs equipped with
communication modules. The UGVs move along the
roads damaged slightly and deicide the shared bandwidth
capacity. Then, the UAVs access the UGVs to use the
shared bandwidth to serve the disaster communication
devices.
• Bandwidth Allocation Scheme: In order to transmit
rescuing data between UGVs and UAVs with limited
bandwidth, we investigate a game-based bandwidth allocation framework. The Stackelberg game is used to model
the interactions between UGVs and UAVs, where UGVs
are leaders who decide the shared bandwidth capacity and
UAVs are followers who adjust access selection strategy.
Besides, we utilize the non-cooperative game to represent
the competition among UGVs and the evolutionary game
to indicate the access selection of UAVs. Furthermore,
through the backward induction method, an iterative algorithm is proposed to attain the Stackelberg equilibrium.
• Simulation Evaluation: We evaluate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of our proposed scheme with plenty of
simulations. The results prove that our scheme can motivate participants to select access points legitimately,
effectively allocate bandwidth resources, and bring higher
utilities for both UAVs and UGVs than the conventional
counterparts.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We describe
related work in Section II. Section III presents the system
model. In Section IV, the problem formulation is described in
detail. Section V shows the game analysis of UGVs and UAVs.
Simulation results are shown in Section VI and we conclude
the paper in Section VII.
II. R ELATED WORK
Recently, UAVs are widely adopted for post-disaster rescue
in the affected areas. Yang et al. [7] formulated data transmission problem by utilizing multi-UAVs in disaster areas
and optimized the trajectories of UAVs, task completion time,
and energy consumption. An adaptive arrangement scheme of
UAVs was proposed by Nan et al. to resolve the coverage problem in UAV-aided GNs communication networks to achieve
the maximum coverage [8]. In [9], Wang et al. proposed that
the emergency information can be transferred from the UAVs
to ground users in a multicast mechanism in the disaster relief
network.
There are several resource allocation schemes in communication networks. Li et al. ﬁrst express the signiﬁcance
of allocating bandwidth appropriately for stream-reservation
trafﬁc under the Credit-Based Shaping and construct a general

A2G
A2G

A2G

B

Base Station

UGV

UAV

A2G

Slightly damage Severely damage Obstacles

UAV Group

Fig. 1. UAVs and UGVs cooperated emergency communication network in
the disaster area.

schema for its bandwidth allocation in [10]. A stochastic
optimization problem of jointly selecting client and allocating
bandwidth with energy constraints of long-term client was proposed in [11]. Besides Xu et al. [11] developed an algorithm
that employs available wireless channel information currently
but guarantee long-term performance. In [12], a bandwidth
allocation methodology was proposed with considering the
inter-beam interference by Kawamoto et al. to allocate the
resources of the satellite communication system.
However, most of bandwidth allocation schemes can not be
applied in the disaster relief network directly. Some of above
networks are established only by UAVs. Due to the limitation
of battery capacity and communication power, it’s not practical
that UAVs working for a long time and transmit data to
remote control center. Others heavily rely on terrestrial base
stations, which can be damaged seriously due to the natural
disaster. In our work, we build the disaster relief network
with UAVs and UGVs. UGVs equipped with communication
modules are introduced to take over the work of base stations.
The advantages of these two kinds of unmanned vehicles
complement each other.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL
In this section, we present the system model including
UGVs motion model, UAVs motion model and communication
model. UGVs equipped with communication modules can be
deployed in the disaster areas. UAVs can provide communication services to the ground devices.
A. UGVs Motion Model
As shown in Fig. 1, we consider the disaster relief network
consisting I UGVs and J UAVs. Let I = {1, 2, ...i, ..., I} to

1499
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3

denote the set of UGVs. UGVs can drive automatically along
the predeﬁned and damaged slightly path in the disaster area.
Here, we adopt a time slot model [13] [14], each time slot is
equal and the length is τ . tk represents k-th slot. At time slot
tk , the velocity of i-th UGV is v i,k . And the maximum and
minimum velocity of UGV i are vimax and vimin , respectively.
Since there exist some puddles and cracks on the roads,
UGVs should avoid these obstacles. The length of road with
η lanes that UGV i travels along is Li . The area of road Li is
Si . Similar to [15], the spatial distribution of obstacles follows
a Poisson Point Process (PPP) distribution with a constant
density λ. Hence, the number of obstacles on each lane is
λSi
η . In the moving process, UGVs would follow a circular
path to avoid obstacles with radius Ri (Ri > 0). In order to
simplify the calculations, the impact of obstacles avoidance on
the time of UGVs is transformed into the impact on UGVs’
velocities accordingly:
v ′i,k =

v i,k ηL
.
[L + (πRi − 2Ri )] λSi

(1)

The trajectory of i-th UGV can be expressed as q i =
[qi,0 , qi,1 , qi,2 , ..., qi,k , ...], where the beginning position is
qi,0 = (Xi,0 , Yi,0 , 0). And qi,k = (Xi,k , Yi,k , 0) denotes the
position of i-th UGV at time slot tk . The movement of UGV
i satisﬁes the following constraints:
 qi,k − qi,k−1 = τ v ′i,k , ∀i ∈ I,

(2)

vimin ⩽ v i,k ⩽ vimax , ∀i ∈ I.

(3)

B. UAVs Motion Model
UAVs can connect to the ground UGVs through Orthogonal
Frequency Division Multiplexing Access (OFDMA) technology. Each UAV connects to at most one UGV in each time slot,
but one UGV can be accessed by multiple UAVs simultaneously. The set of UAVs is denoted as J = {1, 2, ..., j, ..., J}.
We can divide all UAVs into many groups according to
different mission features [17]. Let G = {1, 2, ..., g, ..., G}
denote the set of UAV groups, where the number of UAV
groups is G. There are Ng UAVs in g-th UAV group. The
g
working altitude of UAV j in group g is Hj,k
, the cruising
velocity is v gj,k , the maximum and minimum velocity are vjmax
g
g
g
g
and vjmin , respectively. We denote qj,0
= Xj,0
, Yj,0
, Hj,0
g
as
of j-th UAV in group g and qj,k =

 beginning position
g
g
g
, Yj,k
, Hj,k
as the position of j-th UAV in group g
Xj,k
at time slot
 tk . The trajectory of j-th UAV is expressed
g
g
g
g
by q j = qj,0
, qj,1
, qj,2
, ..., qj,k
, ... . Therefore, the motion
constraints of j-th UAV can be expressed by
g
g
 qj,k
− qj,k−1
= τ v gj,k , ∀j ∈ J,

(4)

vjmin ⩽ v gj,k ⩽ vjmax , ∀j ∈ J.

(5)

C. Communication Model
UAVs and UGVs connect with each other through the airto-ground (A2G) link. Since UAVs utilize the bandwidth of
UGVs to provide communication services, each UAV needs

to connect to a UGV. The distance between UGV i and UAV
j can calculated by

g
2 .
(6)
dgi,j,k =  qi,k − qj,k

At the k-th time slot, the connection status between UAVs
and UGVs can be denoted as ai,j,k , which is a binary
parameter. If a connection is established between the i-th UGV
and j-th UAV, ai,j,k = 1, otherwise ai,j,k = 0. Therefore, we
I
can obtain i=1 ai,j,k ⩽ 1.
The transmission power of each UAV is Pj . There is no
co-channel interference among UAVs in the different groups
accessing the same UGV. Therefore, the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) is
g
Pj βij,k
(7)
hi,j,k =
,
σ2
g
= gβ0 2 is channel gain, σ 2 means the additive
where βi,j,k
(di,j,k )
white Gaussian noise at the receiver, and β0 represents the
channel gain when the reference distance is 1m.
Supposing that each UGV is equipped with a single antenna,
and the bandwidth capacity that UGV i decides to share
is Bi . In order to ensure fairness, each UGV divides the
bandwidth equally among the connected UAVs. Therefore, the
transmission rate between i-th UGV and j-th UAV is
Bi
g
ri,j,k
= ai,j,k
log2 (1 + hi,j,k ) ,
(8)
Ni,k
where Ni,k represents the number of UAVs connecting to
i
UGV i at time slot tk . Additionally, we have NBi,k
⩾ bmin > 0,
where bmin is the bandwidth threshold.
IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we propose a bandwidth allocation scheme
among UAVs and UGVs. Firstly, a bandwidth allocation
framework is introduced. Secondly, we formulate the utility
functions of each player. Then, we show the details of the
resource allocation based on the Stackelberg game.
A. Bandwidth Allocation Framework
In the disaster area, UGV i decides the capacity of bandwidth Bi for sharing to UAVs in the emergency communication network, and then announces its decision to UAVs.
Meanwhile, according to the shared bandwidth capacity, UAVs
select their own access points, i.e. UGVs.
To enable UAVs and UGVs cooperate with each other to
maximize the transmission data rate for the entire communication network, a bandwidth allocation framework is presented.
Speciﬁcally, the interaction between UGVs and UAVs can be
formulated by a two-layer Stackelberg game. Firstly, UGVs
determine the capacity of bandwidth resources shared and
announce them to UAVs. Note that, the capacity of resource
which has a great impact on both network performance and
overall cost should be considered carefully. If the shared
bandwidth capacity of a UGV is too large, a great number
of UAVs will select it as the access point and the network
performance will be degraded. Then, after obtaining the information of shared bandwidth capacity , each UAV can select an
appropriate UGV as the access point for the sake of maximal
network performance.

1500
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:51:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

