2022 IEEE MIT Undergraduate Research Technology Conference (URTC) | 978-1-6654-7345-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/URTC56832.2022.10002208

UAV and UGV Autonomous Cooperation for
Wildfire Hotspot Surveillance
Diego Pasini, Charles Jiang
Marie-Pierre Jolly
∗

The Pingry School–Basking Ridge, NJ, USA
Emails: {dpasini2023, cjiang2023, mjolly}@pingry.org
Abstract—As wildfires burn millions of acres each year around
the globe and have become more severe due to climate change,
wildfire prevention is more important now than ever. Existing
wildfire surveying techniques such as hotspotting and cold
trailing require human interventions that can lead to dangerous
situations or satellite imagery which does not provide realtime data on hotspots. To address this problem, we propose
a low-cost and effective integrated system of robots composed
of an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV, or drone) and unmanned
ground vehicle (UGV, or rover) that autonomously cooperate and
pathfind to detect and investigate hotspots. The UAV monitors a
post-forest fire area from the air and uses aerial footage to create
long-term direction for the UGV to inspect specific suspected
hotspots. The UGV then follows the path to investigate each
hotspot with centimeter-level accuracy. Testing of the pathfinding
system with satellite imagery yielded highly accurate and consistent results necessary for high-precision autonomous navigation
when investigating hotspots in dynamic environments.

Fig. 1. Overview of the UAV and UGV Cooperative System

I. I NTRODUCTION
Wildfires have an enormous human, environmental, and economic impact on society. In addition to lost human lives and
massive carbon emissions, wildfires cost over $16 billion in
damages to structures and fire management alone in the US in
2020 [1]. An essential part of wildfire prevention is identifying
hotspots which are loose embers that stem out of a larger fire
and light smaller pockets of fire. Currently, hotspotting relies
on different techniques: watch towers, firefighters, satellite
imagery, and aircraft. Watch towers can be expensive as they
require around-the-clock staffing and only provide a limited
detection range and angle of view. Firefighters can be deployed
to detect hotspots and cold trails, which involves putting their
hands in the ground to check for small pockets of embers
after the wildfire has died down, but this procedure can lead to
dangerous situations and requires extensive human resources.
Satellite imagery, albeit precise for hotspot detection, cannot
provide real-time data about these hotspots [2]. Finally, aircraft
such as helicopters and planes can provide imagery for hotspot
detection, but they require space to take off and are expensive
to maintain and fly. The solution we investigate in this paper
involves the integration of a UAV and UGV into a single
autonomous system where the UAV finds a path between
suspected hotspots and the UGV investigates them on the
ground. The UGV also avoids undetected obstacles using our
short-term correction algorithm. Previous research has demonstrated that UAV and UGV cooperative systems are useful for
mapping environments and search and rescue [3], [4]. These
systems, however, have not been specifically developed to
address wildfire prevention through hotspot mapping.

II. M ETHODOLOGY
In this paper, we propose a low-cost scalable system of
UAVs (drones) and UGVs (rovers) to automate hotspotting.
Using a protocol called LDSC (long-term direction, short-term
correction), a drone flies up and creates a long-term path for
the rover based on aerial footage. The rover follows that path
and avoids obstacles unidentified by the drone using short-term
correction.
A. System Overview
The system consists of three main components: a drone,
a rover, and a ground station, as seen in Fig 1. All devices
are connected through a server powered by Apache Kafka to
which data and commands are sent [5]. The order of operations
for the system is:
1) The drone lifts off, travels to its designated waypoint,
and takes a photo of the area in which the rover will be
moving.
2) The image is then sent to the ground station which
creates a path using a modified pixel weighting A*
pathfinding algorithm [6]. The path includes points of
interest detected by the drone (suspected hotspots). Each
pixel in the path is converted to GPS coordinates.
3) The GPS coordinates are then sent to the rover. The rover
follows the path and adjusts to any obstacles overlooked
by A* with an obstacle-avoidance algorithm.

978-1-6654-7345-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I
C OST OF C OMPONENTS FOR D RONE AND ROVER
Component
Frames
Motors and blades
Batteries
Pixhawk
Raspberry Pi
Jetson Nano
Camera
Lidar
Remote Control
Grand Total

Drone
$21.00
$72.00

Rover
$159.00
$44.00

Both

$205.00
$515.00
$22.00

$146.00
$290.00
$56.00
$100.00
$295.00

$593.00

$360.00
$1102.00

Total
$180.00
$116.00
$205.00
$515.00
$168.00
$290.00
$56.00
$100.00
$360.00
$1990.00

Fig. 2. The Drone

C. Software
The rover and drone use Python 2.7 and several Python libraries, including MAVProxy 1.8.46, DroneKit 2.9.2, OpenCV,
and PyGeodesy 22.7.22 [12]–[15]. A startup script launches
MAVProxy, which connects to the vehicles’ pixhawks. To
begin navigation, DroneKit navigation commands are sent
to MAVProxy. Computer vision is handled with OpenCV
for camera calibration, the A* pathfinding algorithm, and
capturing images, while PyGeodesy helps in the process of
converting image pixels to GPS coordinates.
D. Data Communication & Network Software and Design

Fig. 3. The Rover

B. Hardware Design
In this paper, we built a drone and rover from scratch as
shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. As the drone and rover need
to navigate autonomously, make intelligent decisions, and
communicate with each other during navigation, the vehicles
need to be computationally capable yet physically small.
Seen in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, both the drone and rover use a
pixhawk 2.4.8 as the flight controller [7]. Attached companion
computers allow for communication, autonomous movement,
and computationally heavy tasks. The drone uses a Raspberry
Pi 4B+ to minimize weight, while the rover uses a Nvidia
Jetson Nano for higher computational power [8], [9]. The
vehicles are powered by lithium polymer (LiPo) batteries,
and the companion computers are powered by separate USB
battery packs. Both vehicles localize themselves using a GPS
compatible with an APM serial port. The drone holds a
gyroscopic camera gimbal with 9g servos and an Arducam
Wide Angle lens camera [10]. The rover is driven by one
motor in the back and a servo in the front to steer. It is also
equipped with a SlamTec RPLIDAR A1 unit to provide a 2D
map of surrounding obstacles [11].
All hardware components were purchased from common
marketplaces for less than $2,000, shown in Table I. In total,
half of the budget was spent on components usable for both
the drone and the rover. A detailed list of components and
their costs is available in the Github repository for this article.

The drone, rover, and ground station all communicate using
Apache Kafka. Each device has a consumer that listens to a
topic on a server created on the ground station. Commands are
sent by the producers as JSON serializables. After a consumer
receives a command that is labeled for its device, it analyzes
the command and executes its operations. The device then
communicates to its respective producer to send any data back
to the topic. Any number of devices can be added to this
network using this framework, making the number of vehicles
in the system scalable.
E. Drone
The drone, shown in Fig. 2, is a quadcopter designed to
capture an aerial map of the target area and design a path
between hotspots for the rover to follow. Using dronekit and
waypoint finding, the drone autonomously flies to a target
altitude and GPS coordinates, takes a photo using a gyroscopic
camera mount, and sends that photo to the ground station for
further processing.
1) Gyroscopic Camera Mount: To ensure accurate conversion of pixels into latitude and longitude coordinates, a 2-axis
servo mount is used in conjunction with a mpu6050 to keep the
camera facing the ground irrespective of the drone’s movement
[16]. During the flight, the program starts a subprocess that
perpetually adjusts the x and y-angles of the camera mount to
compensate for tilting.
2) Camera Calibration: The drone uses a camera with a
wide-angle lens to capture 2D images of the ground. Due to
the innate characteristics of a wide-angle lens, optical barrel
distortion causes objects in images to appear closer or further
apart than they actually are. Distinct from the rest of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

system, camera calibration was conducted using the OpenCV
checkerboard test in order to undistort images and ensure
accurate mapping [17]. Several images of a checkerboard were
taken from different viewpoints to estimate distortion coefficients and parameters of the camera. The mean reprojection
error, a measure of the calibration’s accuracy, was 0.0459
pixels, well below the value of 1 that typically represents
accurate estimations. Images were then able to be undistorted
using the estimated distortion coefficients [18].
After taking the undistorted image, the drone waits until it
is connected to the Apache Kafka server, converts the image
into a bitmap/JSON serializable, and sends the image to the
Kafka topic. The drone then returns to its starting waypoint
and lands.

Fig. 4. Diagram of pixel to GPS coordinate algorithm: the blue box represents
the image plane, the green box represents the real world.

F. Groundstation
After the ground station’s Apache Kafka consumer receives
the image from the drone, the ground station converts the
image back into an OpenCV numpy array and performs the
A* algorithm to create a path connecting the nodes of interest
(i.e. the suspected hotspots). In a further embodiment of this
research, existing thermal imaging techniques could be used
to detect the exact location of the hotspots, but this example
used aerial camera footage and manually selected nodes [19].
1) A*: A* is a search algorithm that finds the most efficient
path between two nodes using a heuristic value (the distance
to the end node) and the cost value of moving between each
node. The algorithm is run on an image, representing each
pixel as a node in the graph with up to eight neighboring
nodes. Compared to other algorithms such as Dijkstra, A*
is significantly faster. In this version, the cost (c) of moving
between nodes is represented as a three-dimensional euclidean
distance between the RGB values (each ranging from a value
of 0 to 255) of both nodes shown in the equation below:
c=

p
(r1 − r2 )2 + (g1 − g2 )2 + (b1 − b2 )2

Weighting pixels based on color is used for the cost of the
path, as it provides a way to determine changes in terrain using
a visual camera which is more affordable than other sensors
such as 3D LIDAR or stereo vision. Using color as the cost
means that the path prioritizes roads and other areas of the
map that have similar terrain for the rover to travel on.
2) Pixel to GPS Coordinates: The center of the image
(xc ,yc ) is taken as the GPS drone location (αc ,βc ) where α
is latitude and β is longitude. The altitude and drone location
are known when the image is taken. The degree of the camera
mount in relation to the compass of the drone is also known
and is used to adjust the heading of the photo to face North.
The algorithm to convert a single pixel to GPS coordinate
works as follows.
First, the pixel distance between (xp ,yp ) and (xc ,yc ) is
converted into meter based distance dimgx and dimgy as shown
in Fig. 4. dimg is calculated by dividing the number of pixels
between (xp ,yp ) and (xc ,yc ) by the resolution (pixels per
meter) of the image.

Second, the magnification (M ) of the image is calculated
with the following formula:
M=

idist
odist

where odist is the height of the drone, and idist is the
distance between the lens and the image sensor of the camera.
idist is derived from the lens equation:
1
1
1
+
=
odist
idist
f

idist =

odist ∗ f
odist − f

Where f is the focal length, which was estimated during
camera calibration.
Third, the real-world distance dworldx and dworldy are
calculated as shown in Fig. 4.
dworldx =

dimgx
M

dworldy =

dimgy
M

Finally, the latitude and longitude coordinates (αc ,βc ) of
the pixel are calculated using the Vincenty formula from
PyGeodesy which combines computational efficiency and accuracy up to a meter [20]. The NAD83 datum model of Earth’s
surface was incorporated to improve the formula’s accuracy.
G. Rover
The rover, shown in Fig. 3, is designed to follow the longterm path and avoid obstacles not seen by the drone. After
receiving the GPS path from the ground station, the rover uses
dronekit to autonomously travel to coordinates on the path
representing the suspected hotspots.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 25,2026 at 05:49:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

